]
!,

«jTHE TREE

OF

THIRTEEN

ROBERT

TALKS

BRINGHURST

GASPEREAU PRESS

Printers d Publishers
·M·M·V,!·

I

MEANING

r
~

CONTENTS

9

Foreword

15

The polyhistorical Mind

40

The Persistence of Poetry and the Destruction of
the world

46

The Vocation of Being, the Text of the whole

64

Native American Oral Literatures and the Unity of
the Humanities

81

The Audible Light in the Eyes

107

The Voice in the Mirror

139

Poetry and Thinking

I ~9

The Tree of Meaning and the Work of Ecological
Linguistics

T 77

The Humanity of Speaking

2.06

Prosodies of Meaning: Literary Form in Native
North America

2.57

Wild Language

2.77

Finding Home: The Legacy of Bill Reid

2.99

The silence That Is Not Poetry - and the Silence
That Is

) 2. 3

IJ1dex

32.9

AckJ1owledge111eHts

7

..

THE POLYHISTORICAL MIND

Years ago, on a visit to England, I was introduced to the recently retired head of a prestigious girls' school. The discussion
turned to the subject oflanguage, as postmodern conversations
often do. I was asked what languages I spoke. I replied, in all
honesty, that I spoke none well but that I read a bit of Haida
and Navajo. "What are those?" the headmistress asked, and I
said they were Native American languages. This terminology
was unclear to her, and I eventually explained that they were
languages spoken by what she might call Red Indians. "ohi"
she said. "Did they have languages?"
I thought I should weep, that the articulate, forceful, wellmannered and profoundly ignorant woman before me had
been what is called an educator all her adult life, and I thought
I should rejoice that she was retired. I also thought that if she
could not spend time with Native Americans themselves, she
might at least spend more time with scholars and less with
colonial stereotypes.
But what would the scholars have told her?
Any anthropologist, of course - and ideally any intelligent high-school student - could report to her that the world
has been thoroughly searched for people without language,
and the only people ever found who answer to that description are infants and a few individuals suffering serious injury
Third Ashley Lecture, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario
9 March 1994

15

,I

TheTree

TN

or disease, Adult human beings lacking the mental organ of
language are as rare as human beings lacking a tongue in the
physical sense,

The poems of the Haida poets skaay and Ghandl prove that
there is something deeply wrong with Hoijer's view. skaay and
Ghandl were oral poets, unable to read or write, but they are
anonymous only to those who will not take the trouble to learn
their names and to recognize their talents. They were bearers
of a great intellectual and literary tradition - and because John
Swanton, a good and quiet linguist, transcribed hundreds of
pages of their poems, they continue even now to serve as bearers of that tradition, though their culture is much changed,
their villages are empty, and they themselves are dead, All
human languages are doomed sooner or later to extinction.
So are all species, not excluding ours, In the meantime, the
language of Ghandl and Skaay - because of the wisdom and
skill with which they spoke it, and the care with which John
Swanton wrote it down - is no more doomed to extinction
than Homer's language, or Shakespeare's, or Isaiah's,
Skaay - who belonged to the Haida lineage called Qquuna
Qiighawaay - and Ghandl- who belonged to the ~yahl Llaanas - are, I admit, unusual cases, They are two of the finest
oral poets I know of, in any language, on any continent. But
it would not be hard to call up here and now the ghosts of a
couple of hundred other mythtellers, exemplifying the great
traditions embodied in a hundred other Native American languages, It would not be hard, but to do any kind of justice
to the names and the traditions of these artists would mean
giving hundreds of lectures and writing hundreds of books.
That is a task for a hundred others to take on.

ROBERT BRINGHURST,

But how much more would the scholars have told her, even
if she had asked?
Suppose, to make things easy, she had turned to the standard imperial reference, the Encyc!opc£dia Brital1J1ica, which
was shelved on the wall behind her in the room where we
were speaking? I know, because I looked myself in secret later
on, that if she had consulted that authority, a well-respected
scholar would have told her this:

Indian languages have of course no literature, as this term is ordil1arily
understood, But American Indian groups do possess oral folk cultures,
the a/tOnymous creations of many generations".,
Most, and probably all, American Indian languages are doomed
to extinctioH,." One does Hot therefore study Indian toltgues for their
practical usefulness, or, since they are unwritten, to gaiH a better
understanding of a great literary tradition, But these languages, like
all others, are valuable to the science of language .. " They provide, in
fact, a laboratory""
I

The author of these words, Harry Hoijer, studied with one
of the few undoubted geniuses ever to work in the field of
linguistics, Edward Sapir, But Hoijer's statements prove that
he had not learned what Sapir attempted to teach, These pronouncements, imbued with the authority of the Britannica, are
not good science, not good scholarship, not good history They
are not good prophecy either, They are nothing, in fact, except
the thoughtless repetition of old assumptions: unexamined,
uninformed, untrue, and, I suspect, highly destructive. The
scholar, in this case, like the schoolteacher, is blinded by his
books, blinded by his skill with reading and writing,

Sl

L ;'\1!

II

In I934 an English immigrant to British Columbia compiled an
anthology of stories he had culled from the mythology of the
Haida and other coastal peoples, and rewritten for popular sale

I6

I7

1

L

I[(literature] should turn i)tto pure propaganda or pure entertainment,
society will slip back into the sty of the immediate - which is to say,
the memoryless existence of ltymenoptera and gastropods. None of
this is so important, to be sure. The world can get by nicely without
literature. But without human beings it can get by better yet.

to English colonial readers. "These stories," says their editor,
"existed among the Coast peoples, not embellished by fine or
sonorous language, but told in such a way that their simple
minds understood and appreciated them." 2 Thirty years later
the Warden of Wad ham college, emeritus Professor of Poetry
in the university of oxford, undertook to write about the oral
literature of hunter-gatherers worldwide. He was learned in
Latin, Greek and Russian, but not in any of the languages this
wider study involved. He felt certain nonetheless that in the
cultures he had ventured to describe, myths

are usually told in prose tales of a very simple kiltd with /tone of the
elegance or artifice of song, ltO doubt because this presents less dangers
[sic1in a sphere where errors I11USt be avoided and precisiolt and correctltess are paramount. 3
The Oxford don is less discourteous in his language than the
colonist, but he is not one millimetre closer to the facts.
It is easier to sympathize with the grim view expressed by
Jean-Paul Sartre in 1947. It was not, after all, colonial pride nor
a pretension to omniscience which led him to conclude that
"literature's only chance is the chance of Europe."4 Happily,
this has not turned out to be the case. But in his summary of
the usefulness of literature, Sartre touches on the character
of oral as well as literate culture and reaches far beyond the
boundaries of his favorite continent:

~

If the same headmistress were to ask that same encyclopedia
for basic information on the literatures of canada, she'd be told
that there are two, English and French. she would be told that
charles G.D. Roberts, Bliss Carman, Archibald Lampman and
Duncan campbell Scott "wrote the best poetry composed in
canada before 19 20 :' Roberts, she'd be told, is memorable for
his "nationalistic optimism"; Carman is "a popular poet, even
outside canada" for h is "pagan aestheticism and ... bohemian
vagabondage"; Lampman important for his "natural description and ... social comment;' But it is Scott, she would be told,
who gives voice to "the remote and vast northern wilderness
where the Indian lived, a region and a people that Scott knew
intimately during his long career in the Department of Indian
Affairs:'6 How can a work of reference go so wrong?

III

Human beings have been migrating widely over North America
at least since the last ice age. Some of these movements - like
the migration of the Navajo and Apache south from the Yukon
to New Mexico and Arizona - can be dated fairly closely; others are harder to fix. But it is not hard to distinguish between
these earlier Native American migrations and the colonization
of North America by Europeans. The difference is cultural, not
racial. It is the difference between, on the one hand, families of
hunters learning their way through the landscape step by step,

S'il devait se tourner en pure propagande ou en pur divertissement,
la societe retomberait dans la bauge de I'immediat, c'est-a-dire dans
la vie sans memoire des hymenopteres et des gasteropodes. Bien sur,
tout cela n'est pas si important: Ie monde peut fort bien se passer de
la litterature. Mais il peut se passer de I'homme encore mieux. 5

19
18

1

'~> ~-

turned their offspring loose in the form of fertilized eggs or
seeds, then the task of being human would be out of our control. The genes would be in charge. But we as human beings
take delivery of ourselves in a state of natural and perpetual
incompleteness, for which culture is the one imperfect cure.
That built-in incompleteness is the biological price and the
foundation of free will. We are born questions. Culture is the
thin but sometimes lovely web of answers we keep spinning for
ourselves. Yet the questions are still there - and when we start
to hear them clearly, what we hear is our vocation. A vocation
is a call, but the call is not a command; it is a question.
III

There are over 4,000 living species of mammals and almost
9,000 living species of birds. That is a tiny fraction - less
than a tenth of one per cent - of the total number of living
animal species, but virtually all of those I3,000 species of
mammals and birds have something intriguing in common.
They train their young. They actively define and shape their
species. They have two interlocking kinds of heredity: genetic
and exogenetic. They inherit from the previous generation
not only through the genes but through the senses and the
brain, by learning skills and facts and songs and patterns of
behavior. They then continue learning. And they teach skills
and facts and songs and patterns of behavior to the younger
generation in their turn.
Culture is exogenetic heredity, nothing less and nothing
more. It is everything we transmit from generation to generation by nongenetic means.
Taking a narrow view, we can say that everything required
to practise the vocation of trout or mosquito or Douglas-fir
or black-eyed Susan is transmitted though the genes. It has to

50

T

"~

be, because these and millions of other species abandon their
young as eggs or spores or seeds. But to practise the vocation of
winter wren or black-tailed deer or black bear, or the vocation
of human being, a standard share in the species' genetic bankroll is simply not enough. An education is required. Culture
is not a luxury. It is life-support.
That, to repeat, is the narrow view. In the broader view, it
is obvious that even for the trout or Douglas-fir, its genetic endowment alone is inadequate. The trout needs a trout stream.
The Doug-fir needs a forest floor. All of us - animals, plants,
bacteria and fungi - need the community we create for one
another and the earth that underlies it and the sun that keeps it
warm. The community we create for one another is, of course,
the ecosystem. That is culture in the large sense. Culture in this
large sense is identical with nature. It is nature seel1 from tlte
inside. From the standpoint of any given species, this culture
in the large sense - the environment - is exogenetic too. It is
genetically produced and genetically maintained, but not by
any single species. On its own, no species can create a situation
that enables it to live, much less to thrive.
. If there is anything unusual in the culture of human beIngs, compared with the culture of other animals, it is this: the
degree to which we draw not only parents but grandparents
and ancestors into the educational process. The native nations
of North America claim, quite justifiably, to be more cultured
than colonial societies, because of the strong relationships they
form between children and grandparents, and the respect they
pay in general to their elders. colonial societies, like those of
the old world, though they pack their elders off to retirement
communities and rest homes, claim to be more cultured than
everyone else because of their obsession with old books and
historical records, which extend the thread of exogenetic heredity still further.

51

Human culture has, we like to think, become unusually
complex. We pose more questions and produce more answers,
right or wrong or good or bad, than any other species: shoes,
hats, tools, boats, houses, gardens, ovens, kilns, roads, cities,
epic poems, printed books, sonatas, violins, electron microscopes, rosaries and so on. But all those things are expendable if need be. The essentials aren't the artefacts themselves.
The essentials are the foraging and navigating skills, and the
techniques and understanding of materials that are needed
to make the artefacts - the shoes, hats, tools, boats and so on
- on demand. This knowledge is embodied in the structures
of the mind, and the structures of the mind are embodied in
the artefacts. The mind is part of the body, the body is part
of the world, and the world is part of the mind. The artefacts
move around that circle as long as they are used.
The archaeological dig is a good place to begin the study of
culture. It also helps explain why vocation has two basic connotations: one of the spirit and one of the hand. vocational
schools train carpenters and cooks, yet we are apt to say the
singer and the surgeon and the scholar have vocations. These
are two halves of one meaning. The space between them is filled
with all the kinds of fragmentary work that isn't vocational:
all those aberrations and illusions known as paying jobs. Intellectual and manual vocations have many other things in
common. The institution of apprenticeship is one. Out of that
grows allegiance to the craft, based in the practical realization
that the facts, whatever they are, are not inert; they are the
native tongue of meaning.
Another thing that intellectual and manual vocations have
in common is the danger of misuse, the danger of betrayal by
historical and personal ambitions. Vocation is fascination, not
ambition; it is work emancipated from time: a dialogue with
being, not a program of predation and control. Freedom from

52

time means not just freedom from the clock but freedom from
agendas of apocalypse and freedom from the hunger to make
history. History isn't made; it is discovered. Historical agendas and ambitions - the appetites for conquest and for profit
and for power - often masquerade as real vocations. And true
vocation brings a consciousness of power, which sometimes
spells the end of the vocation out of which it grew. The soldier
and the statesman and the priest, the lawyer and the trader
and the scholar, even the physician, work in the shadow of this
danger. Piety is twisted into missionary zeal, defensive skill is
pumped up into armed aggression, the search for knowledge
withers into hunger for authority.
Beauty, Immanuel Kant says, is something we perceive as
the trace of a certain kind of intention, more or less synonymous with play:
Schonheit ist Form der Zweckmiirsigkeit eines Gegenstandes, sofern sie,
ohne Vorstellung ei nes Zwecks, an i hm wahrgenommen wird.

2

That means, beauty is perceived as the quality of il1Jtocent intent:
the quality of purpose without all}' md ill mind. In forms which
have that quality, Kant says, nature and culture function as
one. And that is close - very close, it seems to me - to the essence of vocation.
You may hear an echo of that notion in something Northrop
Frye said once about the study and teaching of literature,
which was his own vocation:
No aile who beheves tltat he teaches tlte best subject matter in the
world is goiltg to worr}' very much about the goals of teaching ....
There can really be 1to goal where taking the jot/me}' itself is tlte best
thing to be done. 3

53

You may hear that echo once again, in something else Frye
said about his calling - something that bears very closely on the
nature of vocation and on the vocation of the university itself:

The English teacher's ideal is the exact opposite of "effective communication," or leaming to become audible in the market place. What
he has to teach is the verbal expression of truth, beauty and wisdom:
in short, the disinterested use of words. 4
The school may indeed exist for the purpose of adjusting the
student to society. But the teacher exists for the purpose of
frustrating that adjustment. why? Because vocation is better than adjustment, and the two are not the same. vocation
is articulate; adjustment hums along. But why, in a healthy
society, should vocation be a form of maladjustment? Because
society is never healthy in that sense. Health in society means
that maladjustment can be fruitful.
IV

The vocation of every human, I've been saying, is to be a human being. When we succeed in that vocation, what we make
and do is typically humane. And a text, even a sentence, in
order to function, has to be humane. It has to be humane in
a very physiological sense. The mind is no less physiological
than the body.
The word humanism was oddly misunderstood by a nurnber of twentieth-century writers. Many of them defined it,
wrongly, as the view that human beings are or ought to be the
centre of the universe. It is as if they traced the etymology of
"humanism" back to David Hume. In fact the root appears to
be *dhgheJ1t, an archaic IndO-European word for earth. Latin

54

humanus is related to English humus and Greek X66vlOS, as in
chthonic. A human is an earthling. These and other shreds of
linguistic evidence suggest that IndO-Europeans and Native
Arnericans once thought about such matters in similar terms.
In Navajo, humans are called l1ihokaa dine'e, "earth-surface
people." In Haida, they are xhaaydla xhaaydaghaay, "surface
people:' or in the language of classical Haida poetry, xhaaydla
xhitiit ghidaay, "ordinary surface birds." Not the centre of the
universe, but shallow-rooted denizens - and absolute dependents - of the world.
Humanism is not quite a philosophy in the conventional
sense of the word. It is the name of a form of expression,
sensuous and reticent both at the same time. It is the name of
a pagan tradition of thought, alive but not unchallenged in
Periclean Athens, revived to some degree in Augustan Rome,
and powerfully revived once again in the north of Italy during
the Renaissance. It is, like the Jewish tradition, highly literate. It has had to be, for precisely the same reason: because of
persecution. Yet, in its way, it is nearly mum - because it is the
Custom in the humanist traditIon that rich philosophical ideas
are expressed in art and poetry: in images and myths, far more
than in expository or analytical language. What occurs in these
images and myths is what occurs in every developed mythic
tradition. That is, a distillation and condensation of time and
space. Ancients and moderns, christians and pagans, gods and
humans, sinners and saints commingle in similar form and at
similar size. The implicit assumption is not that humans and
gods are equally powerful. The assumption is that gods and
humans are equally interesting, despite the inequity of power,
because they inhabit a single world and are bound by a single
fate. There is one intellectual ecosystem for all, because there
IS one earth on which to live.

55

r-;

their homes intact and left the land that they depended on as
fruitful as it was.
There is a lesson in that, it seems to me, for the universities
- which have become, in some ways, big residential schools for
the world, and which have in their hands the power to sustain
and enlarge and deepen and, especially, to restore the cultural
life of the communities they serve. They also have the power,
like the residential schools, to do enormous cultural damage.
The goal of those schools was to transform hundreds of distinct indigenous societies into a single alternative, and thereby
to replace a sustainable condition of cultural prosperity with
a regime of increasing material wealth and political cohesion.
The cultural prosperity of North America before the colonization arose from the fact that human cultures were sustained
within the larger culture which is nature as a whole. But to
those who ran the schools, the integration of humans with
their natural environment was not just undesirable, it was evil;
it was satanic. The schools therefore taught the subjugation
of nature as a duty.
The biosphere is a self-policing system. plainly it can tolerate human participation. Human management is something
else again. But the unsustainability of a human-centred system
posed no problem for those who ran the residential schools.
If they were faithful to their creed, they expected the age of
human mastery to give way in its turn to the universal kingdom of God.
Take God out of the equation and you have the modern
public university as its political masters conceive it. It is an
institution that aims at a secular millennium: a global state
of limitless material prosperity managed and controlled by
human beings. Most of those elected to public offIce in the
present day appear to actively believe in or passively consent
to such a vision. But many who work inside the university, and

58

some who come to study there, know that the human millennium is unsustainable. The steadily increasing cultural poverty
and material sterility which the search for that millennium has
brought are only a foretaste of what it will actually cost.
Even reluctant observers find it obvious by now that in
a finite and overexploited world, endlessly increasing material wealth for an endlessly increasing number of humans is
a suicidal dream. That leaves us in the short term with two
choices: to continue insisting that humans come first, though
we know that only a few of those humans will ever enjoy the
delusion, or to relinquish the ideal of a global ecology owned
and controlled by human beings. In the long run, of course,
the self-policing biosphere will edit any choice we make, and
its list of alternatives is shorter.

v
It has been argued in the meantime that the university is, or

that it ought to be, just an intellectual or educational marketplace. The market, after all, is also an ecology; it too is
self-policing, we are told, and instruction should be offered,
like guns and butter, strictly in terms of supply and demand.
When society at large or the students in particular want Haida
instead of English and ethics instead of genetics, Haida and
ethics is what they will have.
Universities have never, so far as I know, been truly immune to the law of supply and demand, nor do they need to
be. But we are living now in an era that has taught that law
some complex flips and twists. Commerce, not so many years
ago, was a profession of sometimes grudging, sometimes willmg public service. It was the distribution and supply of what
it pleases us to call material goods. That sort of commerce still
exists - the corner store is not entirely extinct, nor is the camel

59

.
train. But commerce on the whole has changed from a profession of public service to a profession of public predation. Its
function now is not to meet demands but to create them, and
to strengthen those demands, turning them into addictions,
which cause material goods to turn into drugs.
In fact, only some of these commodities are material, like
cigarettes and soda pop and T-shirts and potato chips and
beer. The newer staples of the market are images instead. I
won't dwell here on the power of advertising, market manipulation, and the concoction of empty commodities. I simply
remind you that furnishing people with what they really need
or genuiltel}' want, or what might do them any good, is not the
primary aim of modern commerce.
The study of markets often begins with the basic analysis
and classification of goods. There are capital goods and perishable goods, for example. An equally simple distinction exists
between goods that act like food and goods that act like drugs.
Food, in this analysis, is anything that tends to promote the
independence and autonomy of the purchaser. Drugs are anything that tends to promote the buyer's dependence instead.
In this respect, a shirt or a jacket is food. But if the style of the
garment is a separate salable element, it is probably a drug.
Lottery tickets, by this definition, are drugs. Videotapes and
television programs could be either, but in practice they are
usually drugs.
Perhaps it is worth asking - with these definitions in mind
- to what extent the university serves food and to what extent it pushes drugs. Threats of salvation and damnation, by
this definition, are not food; they are drugs. I suggest to yOU
therefore that during the time when the universities of Europe
were under the strict hand of the church, in addition to serving food, they were also very actively peddling drugs. Islamic
universities, of course, have done the same. with these long

60

'.

and glaring exceptions, I believe we can say that the university
has been fundamentally in the business of serving food. The
Athenian Academy had served intellectual food, so far as we
know, for over 900 years before Justinian closed it. In fact, the
university is the place, or aspires to be the place, that renders
everything wholesome and nutritious. In the university, even
the study of the history of the crusades and the Inquisition, the
Stalinist terror and the genocidal madness of the Third Reich
is rendered educational. The history of madness is transmuted
into sanity, the history of poison into food. The university can
turn even style into a food, where modern commerce turns it.
for reasons of profit, into a drug.
It is curious that universities have undertaken to model
themselves increasingly on the marketplace at the very moment when the marketplace has changed from a colorful
public square, which sells primarily food, into a strobe-lit
global shopping mall selling as little food as possible, because
of course the profit is greater in drugs.
Serving food in this broad sense is a vocation. Making a
profit is not - but it has become a religion instead.
Like all evangelical faiths, modern business claims to bring
great blessings to believers. Here and there a piece of evidence
appears to prove the claim. We do now have in canada - in a
few select locations - better grocery stores than ever before.
Better, at least, than anything since the colonization closed
down the enormous grocery store that was the land itself. These
new alternative grocery stores - the ones that sell nothing but
food, and that tend to sell the best food they can get - are run
by university graduates. That is an interesting development.
A generation ago, people with university educations didn't
go into the grocery business. selling groceries was not a vocatIon; it was a job. The conversion of the market into a system
for dealing in drugs has traltSfoymed the grocery business into

61

T

a serious vocation. Some people who might, a generation or
two ago, have entered medicine or law - not for the money,
but for the vocation of public service - have in the past ten
years gone into the grocery business instead. It may seem a
trifle odd to suggest that the university could model itself on a
grocery store - a small, revolutionary grocery store - but it is
worth a thought. Such a grocery store begins, like any department of classics or anthropology or physics or mathematics,
with the fundamental assumption that what it offers is real in
itself and good in itself, and that no force should be allowed
to make it less so.
VI

The cheerful term postcolonial, which I often hear on campuses
these days, might suggest that the age of destruction is over.
In fact, the colonization is still at fever pitch. The great transformation of gold into lead and of forests into shopping malls
continues. Some analogous transformations can be seen in the
university itself. One of the reagents used for this purpose is
the acid of postmodernism: the thesis that nothing has meaning because everything is language. It works especially well in
parallel with the acid of unrestrained commerce: that nothing
has meaning because everything is for sale. Repeated exposure
to these ideological acids produces human beings who cannot
wonder at the world because they are not at all sure the world
exists, though they can wonder all the more at social power
and reputation. When you take the world away from a human
being, something less than a human being is left. That is the
inverse of education.
To me it is clear that things have meaning because they
are meaning, and that language has meaning - or call have
meaning - because it can speak, poorly but truly, of some

62

~-

i-,

--:';.",'

of the things that language is not. For me, these facts have a
practical outcome: because things have meaning and I want
them to continue to have meaning, not everything is for sale.
In a healthy economy, only the surplus and the precipitate
are for sale, because those are the only things in actual need
of recirculation.
Language listens to the world. I listen with it. What I hear
when I listen is a question, which is listening itself. The question often changes form: from silence to breathing to speaking
to music to voices to visions to silence again. But that is my
vocation. The trail it leaves, more often than not, is a text. Real
texts are the products of vocation, not the other way around.
That is almost all there is to writing.

NOTES

I In 1997, the University of Victoria dissolved its Faculty of Arts and Sciences,
replacing it with two separate entities, a faculty of science and a faculty of
the humanities. The newly created Faculty of the Humanities convened
a series of invitational lectures to address specific aspects of the question
"What are the humanities)" This was one lecture in the series.

2 Critik der uytlteilskraft (1799): §I7.
3 Northrop Frye, On Education (Markham, Ontario: Fitzhenry & Whiteside,

1988): II.

4 011 Educatiol1, P 26.
5 Charles Frankel, "Why the Humanities?" In The HU11lanist as Citi:en, edited
by John Agresto & Peter Riesenberg. (n.p. [washington, DC]: National
Humanities Center, 1981): 3-15.

63

T R R I N G H U R ST

The

NOTES

I

2

Widely varying numbers are given for the past and present language population of North America. A degree of imprecision is inescapable, because
some linguists classify as languages what others hear as dialects. Larger
variations in the numbers stem from differing definitions of North America. Simpletons like me prefer to draw the southern boundary through the
Isthmus of Panama. Ethnographers often draw it along a complicated line
through central Mexico (near the latitude of Tux pan and Tampico) and frequently extend the northern boundary beyond the Bering Strait. Between
the Bering Strait and the Panama Canal, about 270 native languages now
survive, from a precolonial total of something like 500. In "ethnographic
North America," some 200 now survive from a precolonial total closer
to 350. The lower figures given in this lecture are for canada, Alaska, and
the continental USA alone.
This appeared to be the case in I998, but in 2003 Peter Sanger discovered,
in the archives of Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova Scotia, the Micmac
transcript of a story that Susan Barss of Cape Breton dictated to Silas Tertius
Rand in I847 on Prince Edward Island. This may soon be published.

THE AUDIBLE LIGHT IN THE EYES

The whole of France, according to Camus, is a place where
human time and nature's time have mingled past division.
And according to a calendar that mingles nature's time with
manmade time like a glass of wine or a vase of flowers, today is
summer solstice in the year 2000: a good day to be in Paris.
One hundred years ago this month, in a land where the
peaceful mingling of time had been violently upset, a young
man by the name of John Reed Swanton was beginning his
career, defending his doctoral thesis at Harvard. It was a study
of the grammar of two closely related languages: Kathlamet
and Shoalwater Chinook, whose last fluent speaker had been
dead since 1897. Linguistics was not taught at Harvard in those
days - Roman Jakobson was only four years old - but after
taking two degrees at Harvard, Swanton had begun linguistic
work with Franz Boas in New York. A student doing this today
would be expected to transfer to Columbia, where Boas was on
staff. A century ago, alma mater had a meaning it has lost. He
had done his graduate course work in New York, and no one
at Harvard could evaluate his doctoral research, but Swanton
had become a Harvard man, and on the strength of Boas's
recommendation, Harvard gave him his doctorate as well.
Three months later - Tuesday, 25 September 19 00 SWanton stepped ashore in the Haida country, off the coast
College de France, Paris
21 June 2000

80

81

"-,"-,;:-

of British Columbia. In his pocket was a five-page letter of
instructions that Boas had written the previous June. Before
him was a world where smallpox and missionary pressure had
exercised their powerful effects. The skeletons of ancient Haida
structures were still standing in the ghost towns. In the two
inhabited villages, all the traditional houses and nearly all the
monumental sculpture had already been destroyed. Yet as soon
as Swanton asked to hear stories in Haida, the world he was
seeking reappeared. Just beneath the surface, a rich tradition
of Haida oral literature lay secretly alive.
Swanton's Haida teachers saw at once how his talents could
be used. They told him what they wanted written down and
declined to tell him what they didn't - and Swanton eagerly
went along, ignoring Boas's instructions. He took dictation and
language lessons six days a week for a year and spent another
two years editing the texts he had transcribed. These texts
include the following:
1

a myth cycle of epic length (close to eight hours long in oral
form; in printed form about 5,500 lines) dictated in october
19 00 by the poet skaay of the Qquuna Qiighawaay;

2

the longest and by far the most complex version of the
Raven Cycle ever recorded on the Northwest Coast, about
two hours long, again dictated by the poet Skaay;

3 a village history of great literary stature and once again of
epic length - at least six hours, and in printed form about
4,000 lines - dictated in December 19 00 by Kilxhawgins
ofTtanuu;
4 about eighty independent narratives, averaging twenty
to forty minutes but ranging in length up to two hours

82

\-:

each, dictated for the most part by three oral poets named
Ghandl, Haayas, and Kingagwaaw;
5 several thousand lines of autobiography dictated by an old
warrior and trader by the name of sghaagya; and
6 a great deal else belonging to the four main genres of Haida
oral literature, which are qqaygaaJtg (myth), qqayaagaaltg
(lineage story), gyaahlghalaJtg (history, autobiography,
memoir) and sghalaaJtg (song).
In short, what Swanton heard, and single-handedly transcribed, was a literature of classical dimensions and complexity
and power. At the end of his first month of transcribing, Swanton
likened the work he was hearing to Homeric epic,' and indeed
the resemblance is deep although the surface similarities are few.
When they were made, swanton's Haida texts formed the
largest body of literature transcribed in any native language
north of Mexico, and by far the largest literary corpus from
the Northwest Coast. This has not remained the case. Boas and
his colleague Qixitasu', working separately and together from
1886 until 193 1, wrote about three times as much in Kwakwala
as SWanton did in Haida in the course of that one year. Thanks
to the work of other devoted scribes, working steadily for
decades, there is now also more to read in Navajo, Meskwaki,
Inuktitut and Cree than there is in Haida.
The eight-hour cycle that I mentioned, dictated by the
Haida poet skaay of the Qquuna Qiighawaay, nevertheless
remains one of the longest and most complex works of N atIve American oral literature ever recorded. And embedded in
Sghaagya's autobiography is a set-piece poem composed and
performed as part of a peace-making venture some fifty years
before Swanton wrote it down. It dates in other words, from

83

"-,'

roughly 1850. As such, that little poem is almost certainly the
oldest single piece of literature we have from the Northwest
Coast. It is one of the oldest surviving actual texts in any Native canadian language. More to the point, the major authors
in Swanton's collection - skaay, Ghandl, Haayas, Kingagwaaw
and Kilxhawgins - have survived as major authors, patiently
waiting for the rest of us to recognize how good they really are.
Back in Washington and New York, neither Boas nor anyone else appeared at first to see the value of this work. The
most important of Swanton's manuscripts sat unpublished in
Boas's office for more than thirty years and has been sitting,
still unpublished, in a Philadelphia library since Boas's death in
194 2 . The rediscovery, retranslation, and publication of these
texts as literature rather than anthropological data or folklore
therefore stands as a new phase - not an entirely peaceful phase
at the moment - in the generally bleak and dispiriting history
of interaction between Europeans and Native Americans on
the Northwest Coast.
The appreciation of Native American oral literature as literature is not, however, a new idea. Native American audiences have been appreciating the skill and wisdom of their
mythtellers for centuries, no matter how slow outsiders have
been to catch up. And a few of the outsiders were not so slow at
that. The literary qualities ofN ative American literature were a
central concern to Jeremiah Curtin, who was born two decades
earlier than Boas, and the example curtin set was important
to Edward Sapir. But Curtin spent little time on the Northwest
Coast and did his most serious work on Seneca. In a more technical sense, the study of native literatures as literature startS
late in the 1950s. That is when Dell Hymes began his lifelong
study of literary form in Native American oral literature. ThIS
has proven an extremely fruitful line of enquiry. Like the work
of Vladimir Propp, Roman Jakobson, and Claude Levi-strauss,

84

it also proves the essential seamlessness of literary studies and
linguistics - a seamlessness that far too many linguists, and far
too many literary critics, still ignore and some deny.
swanton is important in this respect not just because he
took a lot of texts that are literarily superb, but because a sense
of literature, of poetry, ofliterary value, is something he and
his Haida teachers shared.
I regret my own long-standing habit of referring to these
texts as Swanton's texts, after the man who wrote them down.
I think we ought to call them, like other works of literature,
after the names of their actual authors. But Swanton's contribution was essential. He did far more than take dictation. He
asked for stories to be told; he paid the tellers to tell them, and
he paid, in every case, for a capable and fluent Haida listener,
so that he as the transcriber was always in a tertiary position.
He also, almost always, let the storyteller choose the size and scope
and content of the work. The effects of this procedure are easy
to see. During his year in the Haida country Swanton functioned not just as a linguist and ethnographer. He functioned
as a major patron of the literary arts. No better use was ever
made of the Bureau of American Ethnology's congressional
appropriation or the American Museum of Natural History's
bUdget for ethnographic research.
Along with John Swanton, the significant transcribers
of classical North American oral literature include Leonard
Bloomfield, Franz Boas, Ruth Bunzel, Roland Dixon, Pliny
Goddard, Berard Haile, John Hewitt, Melville Jacobs, William
Jones, Michael Krauss, Li Fang-lwei, Ekkehart Malotki, Douglas Parks, Paul Radin, Edward sapir, cornelius Uhlenbeck and
Gene Weltfish: all familiar names to specialists but to the literary public quite unknown. Yet they are just as important
In their way to the sustenance and propagation of culture as
Carnegie or Morgan or Guggenheim or Barnes.

85

Four of the great transcribers published significant theoretical work and so acquired scholarly renown. These four are
Boas, Radin, Bloomfield, and sapir. But the people who told
them the stories - even the best and most prolific of those
who told them the stories - and who in consequence deserve
the fame the most, have attained it least of all. I am thinking of mythtellers such as Kainaikwan in Blackfoot; ~ld in
Chinook and Kathlamet; Fran~ois Mandeville in Chipewyan;
Id-kisilcaw-pihtokt~w and sakewew in Cree; Anna Nelson
Harry in Eyak; Skaay, Ghandl and Kingagwaaw in Haida;
Hetsmiixhwn in Hanis and Miluk; Sam Brown and Mrs Molasses in Hupa; Bill Ray in Kato; Kootye in Kawaiko; pahlnapi in
Kutenai; Hants'ibuyim in Maidu; chiishch'illts'osi and Charlie Mitchell in Navajo; Saayaacchapis and Qjixxa in Nootka;
Kaagigeepinasi and Midaasuganj in Ojibwa; etaahaaritkari'
in Pawnee; GWlsgwashaan in Takelma, seidayaa and Tsiixwaa
in Tlingit; Nick Tumaka and Leo Zuni in zuni. In an honest
and nonpartisan study of North American literature, these and
other indigenous authors would be given a prominent place.
Yet their names are only now beginning to appear in a few
2
encyclopedias of literature and bibliographical catalogues.
Enlightened North Americans who advocate equality for
persons of all races and all creeds are often far less liberal, or far
less self-aware, in their attitudes toward language. Literature
is taught, in the Americas, in much the way that pizza, wine,
and cheddar cheese are sold: as something foreign at its root,
now also made with skill and pride in the New World. poets
and myth tellers - even the greatest among them - working
in the languages indigenous to canada, the USA, and all the
nations to the south, have, in colonial circles, generally been
regarded as perfectly irrelevant to the culture and identity of
the countries in which they were born.
Yet there are all those texts to read. There is all that proof

86

that literature, great literature, belongs to the Americas as fully
as salmon, tomatoes, corn, and squash.
The patron saint of all this text collecting is of course Franz
Boas. Like many saints, he proves to be a highly complex character with secular as well as sacred interests. I would like to
spend a moment considering the impact made upon his work
by two men less well known. One of these was a Frenchman.
The other was one of the greatest N ati ve American oral poets

ever recorded.
The first substantial anthology of Native North American
texts was gathered by Emile petitot, a native of Dijon, and
published in 1888 in Alen~on. Most of the texts are Athapaskan
- Chipewyan, Dogrib, slavey, and Gwichin - but there is a
supplement in Cree, all with parallel French translation. The
book was subsidized by a well-to-do philologist, the Comte de
Charencey, who was dissatisfied with Petitot's first treatment
of these stories: a bowdlerized and prettified translation published in Paris in 1886 as part of a library of popular literature,
and as such still in print.
Boas rarely mentions these two books, but I think they had
considerable impact on his thinking. Directly after the first
and more popular version ofPetitot's anthology was published,
Boas started working on a popular collection of his own: 111dialtische Sagen VOlt dey Noyd-paciftsche1t Kiiste A111erikas. Most
of the work for this anthology was completed by the fall of
1889, and all of it by summer 1890, though the full text was
not issued until 1895. In the meantime, two important events
had occurred. First was the publication of the more rigorous
version of Petitot's anthology, with full aboriginal texts and
mUch more literal translations. The second was Boas's meeting,
in the summer of 1890, with a 58-year-old oral poet named
~lti. The jubilant letters Boas wrote his wife and parents to
commemorate that meeting show that Boas sensed, early on,

87

r'"

what later and more careful study would confirm.3 In years
of pestering Native Americans for stories, ~lti was the first
great myth teller, the first real poet, the first substantial man of
oral letters that Boas had ever met.
Culture, of course, is not genetic. Ethnological identity has
to be learned, where biological identity does not, but it has to
be learned from those who possess it. Like skaay, ~ld was not
only a poet; he was a library: a living means for the reproduction of his own civilization.
Boas had done serious transcription work before, with the
two Tsimshian mythtellers and singers he called old Matthias
and Mrs Morison, but he recognized ~lti as an artist of a different order. Accordingly, Boas rearranged his travel plans and
spent three seasons with ~lti, in 1890, 1891, and 1894. These
were some of the most fruitful years of Boas's life. ~lti's two
books, chinook Texts (1894) and Kathlamet Texts (1901), are the
pride of the harvest. They were the first indigenous texts of
genuine substance published by Boas - the first proof he could
really do the job - and they are the first substantial printed
books by a single Native North American author.
Another result was less direct. In 1896, under Boas's direction, John Swanton had started doctoral work on Lakhota.
Then, brooding on the brilliance of the stories told him by
~lti, and on the imminent extinction of his languages, Boas
overruled his student's decision. And so ~lti became not
only the first Native American author to have his own book;
he also became, if anyone cares, the first Native American author to serve, albeit surreptitiously, as the subject of a doctoral
dissertation: Swanton's "Morphology of the chinook verb."
Swanton never met ~lti, but that poet's literary skill is the
underlying reason why Boas leaned on Swanton to set aside
his study of Lakhota and work on chinook and Kathlam et

ary form and literary value from ~lti. He spoke about this
sense of form and value very little, but his actions leave no
doubt that he possessed it. That was the sense he put to work
when he arrived in Haida Gwaii, where he sat with fanatical
patience at the feet of the best mythtellers he met. It was the
sense he put to work again a few years later, defending his
transcriptions against everyone's attempts, including Boas's,
to cut them down to preconceived dimensions.
The way to prove what I have said about these texts would
be to offer some examples, but listening to myths takes time,
and listening for style in a foreign tongue or through the veil
of translation takes a lot of time. In printed form, this time
turns into space. A thousand pages, I have discovered, is barely
sufficient to layout the evidence.4 What I would like to do
instead, in the time and space we have, is attempt a short demonstration of certain familiar features of mythtelling. These are
features often found in the masterworks of Native American
literature, but I will show them to you here in a different form,
relying on mythtellers who work in a different medium and
belong to a different tradition.
II

Figure I (overleaf) is an instance of mythtelling. The medium
is oil on canvas instead of spoken words, and the mythteller
- Diego Rodriguez de Silva y velazquez - is a figure known
by name to millions of admirers of European art. In almost
every other respect, this work can be directly and closely compared with accomplished instances of mythtelling transcribed
In North America by linguists like John Swanton. The painting
Was made in Seville about 1618. It is known now as The Kitchen
Maid aJld the SlliJPer at Ellll11ilHS, and it hangs in the National
Gallerv, of Ireland .

instead. Swanton learned his sense of Native American liter-

88

~"-

1

89

"but to study real philosophy, as he is supposed to have studied

predilection, part cultural inheritance or training, part individual inflection or creation. These are the three parts of mimesis. If the proportion of individual creation in human song
is greater than in birdsong, that's no cause for pride, though
it may be very good cause for excitement. What it means is
that nature and culture both are at greater risk from us than
they are from birds.
Another way of answering the music of the world is, of
course, by telling stories. This is the most ancient and widespread of all philosophical methods. But story, like song, is
not a genre that humans invented. Story is an essential part of
language, a basic part of speech, just like the sentence, only
larger. Words make sentences, sentences make stories, and
stories make up a still larger part of speech, called a mythology. These are essential tools of thinking. The story is just as
indispensable to thinking as the sentence.
People have tried to tell me that language is the source and
basis of poetry. I'm pretty sure that's backwards. Language is
what thought and poetry produce. And stories are the fruit that
language bears. You and I are stories told in ribonucleic acid.
The Iliad is a story told in Greek. Stories are pretty ingeniouS
at getting themselves told.
Plato, for good reason, tells his myths, his stories, through
the mouth of a non-writer, Sokrates. This is a link to the older
tradition of narrative philosophy, now ignored in a lot of the
places where philosophy is taught. If you enter into a truly
oral culture, you find that almost all philosophical works are
narrative. The primary way - and maybe the anI}' way - of doing sustained and serious philosophy in an oral culture is by
telling stories. The works of the Haida mythteller skaay and
those of the Cree mythteller Ka-kisilGiw-pihtokew are exce~­
lent examples. Sokrates, I think, would have been happy to SIt
at the feet of either one - not to practise debating technique

14 6

once with Diotima of Mantinea.
II

what mythtellers do is what scientists do. They think about the
world; they tryout their hypotheses and keep the ones that
work and throw the other ones away. But the assumption made
in myth is that everything of interest is alive, so it can act its
part in a story - and in the mythtellers' world, anything and
everything is potentially of interest. To playa corresponding
part in the kinds of equations scientists write, things must
frequently play dead. And in the scientific world, everything
is potentially interesting too.
In other words, the mythteller thinks about the world by
assuming that the world itself is thinking. The scientist - under
the current regime at any rate - assumes that it is not.
The proposition that the world is empty of thinking is an interesting myth in itself: one that has proven heuristically useful
as well as hugely destructive. Yet it's an odd myth - and so is
any other - for a thinker to believe. Myths are theses, not beliefs.
In normal, healthy cultures (which are not now easy things to
find, among humans or nonhumans) myths are numerous and
various enough to make their literal acceptance quite unlikely.
The work of the mythteller or poet, like that of the scientist, is
learning how to think, not deciding what to believe.
When scientists reject a piece of work, they frequently describe it as bad science. This can mean pseudoscience disguised as
the real thing, or it can mean ~awed science, the real thing in
need of some correction. Poets and visual artists use essentially
the same terminology. "Bad art" or "bad poetry" can mean
either flawed work, not perhaps beyond repair, or fake work,
to be rejected outright.

J

147

~

,L

Is there such a thing as bad mythology in this double-barreled
sense? There is indeed.
Bad mythology in the sense of fake mythology is almost
everywhere you look in the present day. It comes in commercial forms - for example, in the claims that drinking a certain
brand of soda pop, driving a certain kind of car, or wearing
a certain brand of clothes will make you a different person.
It also comes in social forms - the pseudomyths of racial and
religious superiority, for example, routinely used as licenses
for plain old selfishness and greed. "Social mythology," like its
sister "social science," is remarkably prone to error.
There is plenty of fiawed mythology too: flawed in the same
way that science can be flawed. Mythtellers are artists, and artists, like scientists, mustn't get sidetracked or hurried. They
have to make concise, economical statements; they have to
see the welt in the dew. They also have to see the dew in the wen;
they have to leave room for the facts in all their messy glory.
Myth, like science (and like a bureaucracy), is flawed when it
falls for its own explanations. I'll give you an example.
The Crow or Absaroka people once ranged over most of
eastern and central Montana and a large part of wyoming.
Beginning in 1870 they were squeezed onto a series of reservations, which afterward were quickly whittled down. By 1884,
they were reduced to their present allotment, east of the pryor
Mountains, in southern Montana.
You could say, if you're determined to be cheerful, that the
Crow have suffered less from the colonization than most other
indigenous groups in North America. Between the early eighteenth century and the early twentieth, disease and starvation
reduced their numbers by only about eighty per cent. The best
estimate of their precolonial population is 8,000 to IO,OO~.
The census of 1905 showed a total of just over 1,800. In 1930 It
was under 1,700. After that, the numbers began to rise. By the

14 8

I990s, tribal enrolment was back to precolonial levels - and
most adults were bilingual in English and Crow.
One of the people who lived through that difficult transition to reservation life was called iaxishiilichesh (YellOw-Brow).
He was born about 1860 and died around 1940: not the best
of times to be a native human in Montana. Early in his life
the Crow were fugitives in their own land; from 1870 until his
death they were missionary targets and noncitizens at best. It
would be hard to get a good education under such conditions.
But from his father Iipiakaatesh (Magpie) and other old men,
YellOW-Brow learned a lot of traditional lore.
In I9IO, Yellow-Brow's life began to intersect with the life
of a young man named Robert Lowie. iaxishiilichesh was a
mythteller, Lowie was a scientist, but the two had much in
common - more perhaps than either of them knew.
Lowie was born in Vienna in 1883. At the age of ten, he
moved with his family to New York City. There he spoke German at home, English at school, and won prizes for his command of Latin and Greek. At college he continued to do classics
but spent all of his free time on zoology and botany, then tried
chemistry, which led him into physics. After graduation, he decided to turn his status as perpetual outsider into a profession.
He began to study anthropology and linguistics at Columbia
with Franz Boas. He also took a job as a field researcher for the
American Museum of Natural History.
So in the summer of 1906, the 23-year-old Mr Lowie, whose
sense of the natural world had been formed in the grounds of
Schonbrunn Palace and in Central Park, arrived by stagecoach
In the Lemhi valley, Idaho. He had much to learn, including
how to speak and understand a little Shoshone, and how to
saddle, ride and feed a horse. The following summer he was in
Alberta and Montana, growing more comfortable in the saddle
and learning bits of Blackfoot, Cree, Lakhota and Crow.

149

,..,r
i

Over the next ten years, Lowie also learned some rudiments of chipewyan, Hidatsa, Comanche, Hopi, Paiute, Ute
and washo, but it was in the valley of the Little Bighorn, on
the Crow Reservation in Montana, that he formed his deepest
friendships with Native American people. He was there every
summer from I9IO to I9I6 and went on studying the language
all the rest of his life. Lowie's last visit to the Crow was in I931.
He spent the whole of that summer taking dictation, mostly
from friends he had known for twenty years. The person he
listened to most was Yellow-Brow: iaxishiilichesh.
One ofYellow-Brow's stories recounts, in roughly forty
minutes, the creation of the world. It begins quite handsomely:
Saapa mbiliflak Isaahkawuate
mbalaaxtak.
Ilak, «At duk mbi tachkaat xawifk.
Mbaasaapacham awakal itu k
awaxpuk mbaliflituk
fchii·iwaachik.
Mbi tachkaatxawifk,» hfhchiluk.3

WHERE the water and the old CO}'ote came from
I don't lotow.

grebes, I suspect - and a conversation begins. Mbalalasahtaauwishi?, old Coyote asks: "Does it seem to you that anything
exists?" saap dalas koota? "What does your heart say?" By way
of answer, one of the grebes dives and stays down a very long
time. He comes back with mud and vegetable matter. Out of
these, old Coyote makes the world, complete with trees and
grass, coulees and rivers. Using earth for his raw material, he
also makes humans, all the other kinds of waterbirds , and all
the other animals - except of course for coyotes. One of those
just shows up out of nowhere.
As creation proceeds, old Coyote becomes more and more
creative, and iaxishiilichesh begins to sound more and more
like Empedokles. When the trickster makes the prairie chicken,
for instance, he does so by combining buffalo muscle, bear
claws, coyote claws, box-elder leaves, and a hairy caterpillar.
This leads to some lively dancing, and then to a lively discussion between the old Coyote and a jealous, short-tempered
bear who wants to do some dancing too.
Shiilape, "Yellow Nose," the younger coyote, who has wandered in from nowhere, takes this opportunity to tell his elder
brother how important it is for people to dislike each other.
We should speak different languages, he says, to further the
cause of misunderstanding.
Mbaapem mbale ndasitak,

"And furthermore," he said, "I'm ullhappy all aloJte.
If I saw aJtother perSOlt,
if I spoke with someolte sometimes,
that would be alngltt.
I'm Hlthapp}l all alolte," he said, tlte}l say
Then old Coyote meets lltbliaxaaku11t iatkaatHllt duupkash~
ishnt hishik}'aantk, "two small, red-eyed waterbirds" - eare

I50

mbaapem mbalelaas kawfilak,
allch i lak alaxawi flak mbatu uch ishdak,
mbaam mbeelftbak fiwatbasfchiwak.

If Olte day we're happ}l,
the Itext day we're ltot,
if good altd bad are stirred together,
thelt we'!! like what we calt do for Olte another.

I5 I

'" ~-~ 1': , , :l.

Flirting is also important, Shiilape says - but right after
that, Shiilape's artful flirting with dangerous ideas is brought
to a halt and the myth gets into trouble. old Coyote insists
on describing, at too great a length and with too little humor,
some of the ways in which men should take advantage of
women, and iaxlshiilichesh himself steps in to explain that
Absaroka men routinely lord it over their women because old
Coyote did it before them.
One of the basic tasks of science and of mythology is describing how things are and setting them in context. "Setting
them in context" is often called "explaining why" - and, as
everybody knows, it is a never-ending process. One why always
leads to another, and science and mythology march on. But
explaining the shape of the universe is one thing; justifying
habitually shabby behavior is something else. Myths that set
out to explain something overtly - etiological myths, as they're
called - often slide into justification, especially if what they
explain is sociological. The mythteller, like the geneticist and
the philosopher, should never have an agenda.
None of the other stories that Yellow-Brow told to Lowie
makes that sudden lurch into defensive etiology. So what went
wrong in this case? Did Yellow-Brow - then an old man with
no teeth and a much-admired storyteller - have a permanent
grudge against women? Did he simply feel like throwing his
narrative weight around on that particular day? Or did he ~e­
liberately scuttle the myth to bait his old friend Robert LOWle,
a man of intense propriety and reserve,4 who in 1931, at the age
of 48, was at long last contemplating marriage? luella cole, the
Berkeley psychologist whom lowie did in fact marry in 1933,
was also in Montana in 1931, watching lowie and Yellow-BroW
work. Yellow-Brow would have watched her watching. The
joke he played did damage to the myth, but it is evident that
Yellow-Brow and lowie both thought it was a good one.

152

T

III

By coming to North America with his parents in 1893, Robert
Lowie was spared direct involvement in two world wars - but
as an Austrian of Jewish descent, he spent a lot of time thinking about what he had escaped. It might be good for us to
think about it too.
In the autumn Of1918, while lowie was in New York, the
German army was on maneuvers in the Ardennes. Among
the many units on that front was a meteorological team. One
member of this team was a young man, 29 years old, whose
civilian occupation was teaching philosophy. He was then very
active in the Catholic church but had been called, like many
other academics, into military service. His military job was
making periodic checks on windspeed and barometric pressure, then reporting these to senior officers, who used the
data to schedule attacks with poison gas. This soldier's name
was Martin Heidegger. Twenty-five years later, in the midst
of another war, he continued to insist that it was noble to be
German and godly to die for the fatherland.
Heidegger liked myths, he liked poetic stories, just as plato
and Yellow-Brow did, but he seems to have lacked Plato's suspicions. I don't believe that Heidegger ever suggests that poets
be banished from anywhere. And I wonder if that has something to do with the fact that he missed the crucial difference
between the social myths, or pseudomyths, of the National
Socialist movement and genuine myths - those to be found,
for example, in sophokles' plays.
The centrepiece of Heidegger's IntrodHction to Metaphysics is
a.cho rus from Sophokles' Antigone. That play has lasted a long
tnne - but so has the social myth of Teutonic supremacy, so
perhaps longevity is no test of social value or of truth. The play,
In any case, and especially the chorus Heidegger chose, seems

153

to me to shine some light on the distinction between social
myths and real myths, or the false myths and the true. Poetry,
actually, is the test. The myth of racial superiority doesn't
shine like a flowering apple tree or a star. It isn't poetic. That's
evidence - possibly not proof in itself, but certainly evidence
- that it isn't true.
A few decades ago, when the War in Vietnam was at its
height, AlttigoJ1e seemed a very powerful and current piece of
theatre to me and some of my friends. Much more recently,
I've learned, it's been important to a group of native women
in saskatchewan - and for equally good reasons. Antigone,
remember, is thinking about connections and relations: about
the tough coexistence of resemblances and differences. The
people she's surrounded by are obsessed with homogenization
and division. They want absolute distinctions between enemies
and allies. Their world has shrunk from one to two. The two
are known as "them" and "us."
In sophokles' play, just as in Germany in 1918 and again
in 1943, and among the Crow in Yellow-Brow's youth, all the
able-bodied men are in military service, and the women are
therefore busy. No one is left to sing in the chorus except the
elders. Again and again, the old people of Thebes come out on
stage and do a geriatric dance. And while they dance, they sing,
and while they sing, they think. At the core of the play, sung
by these elders, is the song that reappears, like a lost dream, at
the centre of Heidegger's book. In Greek, it sounds like this:

TTOAAO TO L,ElVO KOUL,EV OVepWTTOU
8ElVOTEPOV TTEAE!'
TO\JTO Ked TTOAIOV TTEpav
TTOVTOU XElfJEpi~ VOT~
XWPE!, mpl~puxioIO'lV
mpwv UTT' oY8f,.lCxo'lV, eEWV

154

TE TOV UTTEpTchav, fCiv
aepenov, oKafJchav oTToTpunal,
IAAOfJEVWV 0pOTPWV ETOS EIS hos,
\TTmi~ YEVEI TTOAEUWV.
KOUepOVOWV TE epVAOV apviewv
ofJepl~aAwv ayE!
Kat eTJpWV oypiwv EeVTJ
TTOVTOU T' ElvaAiav epUO'lV
OTTEipalOI bIKTUOKAWOTOIS,
mpleppa81lS ovijp' KpaTE!
bE fJTJxava!s oypauAou
eTJpOS apEOol~cna, AaolauXEvo: e'
lTTTTov aXfJo:~nal OfJept A6epov ~uy0
OVPEIOV T' OKfJl1Ta Tavpov.
Kat epeEYfJa Kat OVEfJOEV
eppovTJfJa Kat OOTUVOfJOUS
apyos Eblbo:~aTO Kat buoaUAWV
TTO:YWV llTTaiepEla Kat
buoofJ~pa epEUYElV ~EATJ
TTaVTOTTOpoS' aTTOpOS ETT' oubEV EPxnal
TO fJEAAOV' "Alba fJovov
epEV~IV OUK ETTO:~nat·
voowv b' ofJTJXO:vwv epuyoS
~ul·mEeppaoTat.

OOepOV Tl TO fJTJxaVOEV
TExvas UTTEP EATTi8' EXWV
TOTE fJEV KaKov, aAAoT' ETT' EoeMv Epmt.
VOfJOUS TTapEipwv XeOVOS
eEWV T' EVOPKOV biKav
U\jJiTTOAIS' ChOAIS 8T~ TO fJll KaMv

155

~""

":

~VVE<JTl

TO!qJOS xapIV.
[. l1iT' E[.lOl nOpEO"TI0S
YEVOlTO [niT' IO"OV cppovwv
OS Ta8' Ep801.

Heidegger translated the song into German. This is one
attempt to put it into English:

Straltgeltess is frequellt eJtough, bw llothing
is ever as strange as a mall is.
For illstance,
oW there,
ridiltg the grey-malted water,
heav}1 weather 011 tJ1e southwest quarter,
jarred b}' the sea's thullder,
tackillg through the bruise-blue waves.
Or he paws at the eldest of goddesses,
earth, as though she were made
out of gifts alld forg1VCl1ess,
drivillg the plough ill its circle }'mr after year
with what used to be horses.

Birds' miltds climb the air, yet he Sllares them,
am! creatures of the ffield.
These
alld the ftocks
of the deep sea. He wl~lrls
his folded llets for their ~ll1eral shrouds.
Mall the tacticiall.
So, as you see, b}1 J115 sly
illVeJttiollS he masters
his betters: the deep-throated
goa ts of the mou 11 fa i11 ,

15 6

and horses. His yokes ride the necks
of the tireless bulls who Ollce hawtted these hills.
And the soultds ilt his OWl1 throat
gather the breezes that rise in his miltd.
He has leamed how to sit Olt committees
and leamed to build houses al1d barlts
agaiJ1St blizzards alld gales.
He maltages all altd yet 111anages
nothing. Nothiltg is closed
to the reach of his will,
altd yet he has fm!l1d Ito road out of he I!.
HlS fate, we all k110W, is precisely
what he has ltever outwitted.
Wise, yes - or illgemoHs.
More kltowledge thaJl hope ill his haltd,
alld evil C0111es out of it sometimes,
and sometimes he creeps toward 110bility
Warped all the earth's loom
and dyed ilt the thought of the gods,
a mal1 should add beawy al1d strmgth to his city
But he is Ito citizeJt whatsoever
ifhe is tied to the ugl}' b}' fear or by pride
or by greed or by love of dIsorder - or order.
May 110 aile who does 110t still wOllder
what he is and what he does
suddeltly arrive at my fireside.
I hold the very simpleminded view that everything is related to everything else - and that every aile is related to everyOne else, and that every species is related to every other. The

157

T

only way out of this tissue of interrelations, it seems to me ,
is to stop paying attention, and to substitute something else
_ hallucination, greed, pride, or hatred, for example - for sensuous connection to the facts. I think it is not the world's task
to entertain us, but ours to take an interest in the world.
I also subscribe to the view - not original with me - that
the world is constructed in such a way as to be as interesting
as possible. This is a deep tautology. Our minds, our brains,
our hearts are grown out of the world, just as buttercups and
mushrooms are. The world is us, and we are little replicas and
pieces of the world. How could the world be anything other
than as interesting as possible to US?
Yet all it takes to break that link is to try to control the
world, or take it for granted, or ask it not to change or not to
complain while we continue to carve it up. All it takes - and
this is not, evidently, very difficult to do - is to sever the identity of poetry and thinking.

NOTES

I

simone Weil, cahiers, vol. 3 (paris: pIon. 1974): 67-

2

weil, Atte11te de Dieu (paris: Fayard, 19 66): 65·

3 This and the following quotations are retranscribed from Robert H. Lowie,
Crow Texts, edited by Luella Cole Lowie (Berkeley: U of california Press,
19 60): 20 4- 28 . The orthography used here is the standard modern spelling system for Crow, except that initial11lb- is used consistently where the
standard spelling uses either 111- or b-, and initial lld- is used where the
standard spelling calls for either 11- or d-.
4 How much reserve can be seen from Lowie's biography, Robat H. Lowie,
Ethnologist: A Persollal Record (Berkeley: U of california Press. J959).

15 8

THE TREE

OF

MEANING AND

THE WORK OF

ECOLOGICAL

LINGUISTICS

When the European invasion of the Americas began, there
were about sixty languages being spoken in the territory now
known as canada, another sixteen, more or less, in Alaska, and
at least 220 in what are now the forty-eight contiguous states of
the USA. Some of these straddle the borders, of course. I count
a total of about 280 in North America north of the Rio Grande.
There were another two hundred or more from the Rio Grande
to the Isthmus of Panama. About five hundred, you could say,
in North America as a whole. More than that - perhaps in the
vicinity of seven hundred - were spoken in South America.
That's a total of twelve hundred or so in the Americas, out of
six thousand or more in the world as a whole.
Other things being equal- which of course they never are
~ it is probably true that language density increases as biomass
Increases. In practice, languages go where speakers go, and
speakers go, when they can, where the living is good. They also
go where migration routes allow them to go, and in difficult
times, they go where refugees are suffered to exist. So there
are some interesting pockets of aboriginal language density
on the map of North America. California was a magnet for
lI1U nigrants in precolonial times, the same as it is now, and in

--------------------------------------------------------------------Conference on Environmental Ethics. Yukon College. Whitehorse
19July 2001

1 59

,~

created by "advanced civilizations." Some historians claim that
great literatures are only created by great empires. It is true
that the resources of empire can do a lot to increase literary
quantity or literary storage capacity, but literary qHality is independent of that.
Literature, in fact, is as natural to language as language is to
human beings - and for human beings, language is as natural
as walking. Language, in fact, is as natural as eating, which all
living creatures do. Humans have a proven ability to out-talk
and out -eat everything else on the planet, at least in the short
term, and some people seem immensely proud of that. Why,
I'm not quite sure.
Scripture - that is, writing - is a technology, but a seemingly simple technology, like fire. Unlike fire, however, writing
is not - and in the long run can't be - a cultural universal. This
may be why mythographers (myth writers, as distinguished
from myth tellers) usually say that writing wasn't stolen from
the gods but was freely given to humans instead.
Any society that wants this technology can obtain it, but
only those prepared to pay the price, in social self-absorption
and bureaucratic overhead, can keep it. And like other potent
technologies, writing radically alters every society into which
it is introduced. It involves, after all, a kind of ritual mutilation of the intellect, a sort of cerebral circumcision. To this
day there are missionary agencies, both secular and religiouS,
going about the world attempting to spread literacy, claiming that this technology will empower and enfranchise and
enrich all those to whom it is given. What these missionar:
agencies are doing in actual fact is exterminating the earthS
last oral cultures. Those who seek to improve human welfare
by exterminating ancient oral cultures are in need of greater
wisdom - just like those who seek to improve human welfare
by clearcutting the earth's last virgin forests.

164

II

people often notice that language helps them think - and
then they sometimes ask, Are there other ways to think besides
in language? Doubtless a good question; but that, I think, is
not the way to ask it. what the question means is, Are there
languages to think in other thalt the ones in which we talk? And the
answer is,
COHYse! There are the languages of mathematics,
the languages of music, languages of color, shape, and gesture.
Language is what something becomes whe1t YOH think in it. Life as
we know it thinks, it seems, in nucleic acids. The forest thinks
in trees and their associated life forms: asters, grasses, mosses,
fungi, and the creatures who move through them, from annelids and arthropods to thrushes, jays, and deer. Humans
often, but not always, think in words and sentences.
Ideas, according to Marx, do not exist apart from language.
Many others say the same. They are asserting that the only way
to think is in the speech of human beings. The entire natural
world stands as proof that this is false. Yet in a broader sense
- a sense that is equally alien both to Marxist and to capitalist
values - I suspect the claim is true: where there are ideas, there
is language. Mythtellers, however, are prone to remember (and
writers to forget) that the languages of words are not the only
kind of human language, and that the languages spoken by
humans are only a small subset oflanguage as a whole. Some

Of

deeply human stories tell us this is so.
. In the hands of an expert mythteller, stories are a form of
WIsdom. In the hands of anyone else, they may be nothing
more than narrative cliches. Here as elsewhere, everything
d~pends on the tradition - yet everything depends on the indIvidual as well. If you treat the stories with respect, you have
to learn to hear them in their language - their tradition - but
also in the voices of the real individuals who are telling them.

16 5

