E.M . E. R. .G .E .N . C. E.  . 
THE CONNECTED LIVES OF 

ANTS, BRAINS, CITIES AND SOFTWARE 

STEVEN JOHNSON 

PENGUIN BOOKS 



1 

The Myth of the Ant Queen 

It's early fall in Palo Alto, and Deborah Gordon and I are sitting in 
her office in Stanford's Gilbert Biological Sciences building, where 
she spends three-quarters of the year studying behavioral ecology. 
The other quarter is spent doing fieldwork with the native har-
vester ants of the American Southwest, and when we meet, her face 
still retains the hint of a t11Il from her last excursion to the Arizona 
desert. 

I've come here to learn more about the collective intelligence of 
ant colonies. Gordon, dressed neatly in a white shirt, cheerfully 
entertains a few borderline-philosophical questions on group 
behavior and complex systems, but I can tell she's hankering to start 
with a hands-on display. After a few minutes of casual rumination, 
she bolts up out of her chair. "Why don't we start with me showing 
you the ants that we have here," she says. ''.And then we can talk 
about what it all means! ' 

. • • ? 



EMERGENCE 

She ushers me into a sepuld ual room across the hallway, where 
three long tables are lined up side by side. The initial impression is 
thar: of an underpopulated and sterilized pool hall, until I get close 
enough to one of the tables to make out the miniature civilization 
that lives within each of them . Closer to a H abitrail than your tra· 
ditional idea of an ant farm, G ordon's contraptions house an intri-
cate network ofplastic tubes connecting a dozen or so plastic boxes, 
each lined with moist plaster and coated with a thin layer of dirt. 

"We cover the nests with red plastic because some species of 
ants don't see red light," Gordon explains. "That seems to be true 
of this species too." For a second, I'm not sure what she means by 
"this species"-and then my eyes adjust to the scene, and I realize 
with a start that the dirt coating the plastic boxes is, in fact, thou· 
sands of harvester ants, crammed so tightly into their quarters that 
I had originally mistaken them for an undifferentiated mass. A sec· 
ond later, I can see that the whole simulated colony is wonderfully 
alive, the clusters ofants pulsing steadily with movement. The tub-
ing and cramped conditions and surging crowds bring one thought 
immediately to mind: the New York subway system, rush hour. 

At the heart of Gordon's work is a mystery about how ant 
colonies develop, a mystery that has implications extending far 
beyond the parched earth of the Arizona desert to our cities, our 
brains, our immune systems-and increasingly, our technology. 
Gordon's work focuses on the connection between the microbehav-
ior ofi ndividual ants and the overall behavior of the colonies them· 
selves, and part of that research involves tracking the life cycles of 
individual colonies, following them year after year as they scour the 
fesert floor for food, competing with other colonies for territory, 
nd-once a year-mating with them. She is a student, in other 
'ords, of a particular kind of emergent, self-organizing system. 
Dig up a colony of native harvester ants and you'll almost invari· 

ly find that the queen is missing. To track down the colony's 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

matriarch, you need to examine the bottom of the hole you've just 
dug to excavate the colony: you'll find a narrow, almost invisible 
passageway that leads another two feet underground, to a tiny 
vestibule burrowed out of the earth. There you will find the queen. 
She will have been secreted there by a handful of ladies-in-waiting 
at the first sign of disturbance. That passageway, in other words, is 
an emergency escape hatch, not unlike a fallout shelter buried deep 
below the West Wing. 

But despite the Secret Service-like behavior, and the regal 
nomenclature, there's nothing hierarchical about the way an ant 
colony does its thinking. "Although queen is a term that reminds us 
of human political systems," Gordon explains, "the queen is not an 
authority figure. She lays eggs and is fed and cared for by the work-
ers. She does not decide which worker does what. In a harvester ant 
colony, many feet of intricate tunnels and chambers and thousands 
of ants separate the queen, surrounded by interior workers, from 
the ants working outside the nest and using only the chambers near 
the surface. It would be physically impossible for the queen to 
direct every worker's decision about which task to perform and 
when." The harvester ants that carry the queen off to her escape 
hatch do so not because they've been ordered to by their leader; 
they do it because the queen ant is responsible for giving birth to all 
the members of the colony, and so it's in the colony's best interest-
and the colony's gene pool-to keep the queen safe. Their genes 
instruct them to protect their mother, the same way their genes 
instruct them to forage for food. In other words, the matriarch 
doesn't train her servants to protect her, evolution does. 

Popular culture trades in Stalinist ant stereotypes-witness the 
authoritarian colony regime in the animated film Antz-but in 
fact, colonies are the exact opposite of command economies. While 
they are capable of remarkably coordinated feats of task allocation, 
there are no Five-Year Plans in the ant kingdom. The colonies that 

• • • 31 



• • • 'E MERGENCE 

Gordon studies display some of nature's most mesmerizing decen-
tralized behavior. intelligence and personality and learning that 
emerges from the bottom up. 

rm still gazing into the latticework of plastic tubing when 
Gordon directs my attention to the two expansive white boards 
attached to the main colony space, one stacked on top of the other 
and connected by a ramp. (Imagine a two-story parking garage 
built next to a subway stop.) A handful of ants meander across each 
plank, some porting crumblike objects on their back, others appar-
ently just out for a stroll. If this is the Central Park of Gordon's ant 
metropolis, I think, it must be a workday. 

Gordon gestures to the near comer of the top board, four inches 
from the ramp to the lower level, where a pile of strangely textured 
dust-littered with tiny shells and husks-presses neatly against 
the wall. "That's the midden," she says. "It's the town garbage 
dump." She points to three ants marching up the ramp, each barely 
visible beneath a comically oversize shell. "These ants are on mid-
den duty: they take the trash that's left over from the food they've 
collected-in this case, the seeds from stalk grass--and deposit it 
in the midden pile." 

Gordon takes two quick steps down to the other side of the 
table, at the far end away from the ramp. She points to what looks 
like another pile of dust. "And this is the cemetery." I look again, 
startled. She's right: hundreds of ant carcasses are piled atop one 
another, all carefully wedged against the table's corner. It looks bru-
tal, and yet also strangely methodical. 

I know enough about colony behavior to nod in amazement. "So 
they've somehow collectively decided to utilize these two areas as 
trash heap and cemetery," I say. No individual ant defined those 
areas, no central planner zoned one area for trash, the other for the 
dead. "It just sort of happened, right?" 

Gordon smiles, and it's clear that I've missed something. "It's 

32 • • • 



1 t t I r • .Al'lt Qui .n • · 

t t: "'t'\l l tl here: 
th { int th.it' furth t a\i . 
t' n tnt re ul cing! they 'w: 

put tt t m1 lts Ji tan .:c from both 
rule th:ey'r e 

PUt 
" DG!iiSllb}e. tnd put the midden as far 

... h near the dead ants: 
to do the mctry myself, and sure 

it nght. I fuld m}-sclf Llughing out loud 
thou tbey'yc lvcd one of those p.atia.l 

t .tppt".at on $.bn<brdiud tcs • conjuring up a solu-
?C 'fn'"tly t:a!.lDftd to their e-n,;ronment, a solution that 

CUli,V,  ' rump 1an eight-year-old human. The question is, 

lt's a qu 1With and august his:tory, one that is scarcely 
linutcd n> die behavior of ant colonies. We know the 
answer oaw because \W have developed powerful tools for thinking 
about-and moddiog-die emergent intelligence of self-organizing 
S')"SttmS, but dw wu not always so clear. We know now that 
S)'lterm like ant colonies don't have leaders, that the very idea of 
an a.nt •queen• is mi1Jeading. But the desire to find pacemakers in 
such systems has always been powerful-in both the group behav-
ior of the social insects, md in the collective human behavior that 
creates a living city. 

Records exist of a Roman fort dating back to A.D. 76 situated at the 
confluence of the Medlock and Irwell Rivers, on the northwestern 
edge of modem England, about 150 miles from London. Settle-
ments persisted there for three centuries, before dying out with the 
rest of the empire around A.D. 400. Historians believe that the site 
was unoccupied for half a millennium, until a town called Man-

• • • 33 



• • • EMERGENCE 
' 
l 

chester began to take shape there, the name derived from the 
\ 

Roman settlement Mamucium-Latin for "place of the breastlike 
{ 

hill." 
Manchester subsisted through most of the millennium as a non-

descript northern-England borough: granted a charter in 1301, the 
town established a college in the early 1400s, but remained sec- 1 
ondary to the neighboring town of Salford for hundreds ofyears. In a 

,, 
the 1600s, the Manchester region became a node for the wool trade, 
its merchants shipping goods to the Continent via the great ports of h 
London. It was impossible to see it at the time, but Manchester- g 
and indeed the entire Lancashire region-had planted itself at the 
very center of a technological and commercial revolution that would 
irrevocably alter the future of the planet. Manchester lay at the con- d 
fluence ofseveral world-historical rivers: the nascent industrial tech-
nologies ofsteam-powered looms; the banking system ofcommercial 1 
London; the global markets and labor pools of the British Empire. ![ 

The story of that convergence has been told many times, and the al 
debate over its consequences continues to trus day. But beyond the d 
epic effects that it had on the global economy, the industrial takeoff S( 

that occurred in Manchester between 1700 and 1850 also created a \\' 

new kind of city, one that literally exploded into existence. bl 
The statistics on population growth alone capture the force of Ct 

that explosion: a 1773 estimate had 24,000 people living in Man- c 
chester; the first official census in 1801 found 70,000. By the mid-
point of the century, there were more than 250,000 people in the n 
city proper-a tenfold increase in only seventy-five years. That 12 
growth rate was as unprecedented and as violent as the steam 
engines themselves. In a real sense, the city grew too fast for the 
authorities to keep up with it. For five hundred years, Manchester 

if 
had technically been considered a "manor," which meant, in the 
eyes of the law, it was run like a feudal estate, with no local govem- a'  
ment to speak of-no city planners, police, or public health author-

34 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

ities. Manchester didn't even send representatives to Parliament 
until 1832, and it wasn't incorporated for another six years. By the 
early 1840s, the newly formed borough council finally began to 
institute health reforms and urban planning, but the British 
government didn't officially recognize Manchester as a city until 
1853. This constitutes one of the great ironies of the industrial rev-
olution, and it captures just how dramatic the rate of change really 
was: the city that most defined the future of urban life for the first 
half of the nineteenth century didn't legally become a city until the 
great explosion had run its course. 

The result of that discontinuity was arguably the least planned 
and most chaotic city in the six-thousand-year history of urban set-
tlements. Noisy, polluted, massively overcrowded, Manchester 
attracted a steady stream of intellectuals and public figures in the 
1830s, traveling north to the industrial magnet in search of the 
modern world's future. One by one, they returned with stories of 
abject squalor and sensory overload, their words straining to convey 
the immensity and uniqueness of the experience. "What I have 
seen has disgusted and astonished me beyond all measure,,, Dickens 
wrote after a visit in the fall of 1838. "I mean to strike the heaviest 
blow. in my power for these creatures." Appointed to 
command the northern districts in the late 1830s, Major General 
Charles James Napier wrote: "Manchester is the chimney of the 
world. Rich rascals, poor rogues, drunken ragamuffins and prosti-
tutes form the moral.... What a place! The entrance to hell, real-
ized." De Toqueville visited Lancashire in 1835 and described the 
landscape in language that would be echoed throughout the next 
two centuries: "From this foul drain the greatest stream of human 
industry flows out to fertilize the whole world. From this filthy 
sewer pure gold flows. Here humanity attains its most complete 
development and its most brutish; here civilization works its mira-
cles, and civilized man is turned back almost into a savage.,, 

. • • 35 



• • • EMERGENCE 

But Manchester's most and inftuenti2l 
ian was a young IlWl named Fnedrich Engels, who in l&.41 
to help oversee the cotton plant there, and to 
hand the engines of history bringing the working class t:: 
self-awareness. While Engels was very much on P-:"ftl!:: of 
father's firm, Ermcn and Engels, by the rime he um'td ir. 
chcster he was also unde:r the SW2Y oft he r.ad.tal polina 
with the Young Hcgel.Wl school Ht bdriec · " ":tat 
few yea.rs before and had bun to vtllt. 
the socialist Moses Hess., "1\om he'd mn in culy . fin 

in Engiuld wett thUJ .. 
revolution, finanttd by the . · . &p 

wrote, Tlw CwliJ1,, _ F-
rcmlins to mu day one ' the tt lm::::JY 
ta.nds the defiruti,-e aount o i:: 

life in ail it1 tumult d '-'·IUJ\''W'. u:lR!'J 
b d all ttempred to ptun t tr.- , 
their dfurts · lw•  , f 

But TIN Cand_:,fi: i 
mcnr of M cht td · nd\lit!u 

is\ro till t bo 
•.tan 1 teY. In th< 

• 
\ft) ttl 

1- .dt rtildtr u • 

th tm 

t:tl'JN!1t>i c' "'r 

• _} f 

• • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

ing into contact with a working-class quarter or even with 
workers-so long, that is to say, as one confines himself to his 
business affairs or to strolling about for pleasure. This comes 
about mainly in the circumstances that through an unconscious, 
tacit agreement as much as through conscious, explicit inten-
tion, the working-class districts are most sharply separated from 
the parts of the city reserved for the middle class .... 

I know perfectly well that this deceitful manner of building is 
more or less common to all big cities. I know as well that shop-
keepers must in the nature of the business take premises on the 
main thoroughfares. I know in such streets there are more good 
houses than bad ones, and that the value of land is higher in 
their immediate vicinity than in neighborhoods that lie at a dis-
tance from them. But at the same time I have never come across 
so systematic a seclusion of the working class from the main 
streets as in Manchester. I have never elsewhere seen a conceal-
ment of such fine sensibility of everything that might offend the 
eyes and nerves of the middle classes. And yet it is precisely 
Manchester that has been built less according to a plan and less 
within the limitations of official regulations-and indeed more 
through accident-than any other town. Still ... I cannot help 
feeling that the liberal industrialists, the Manchester "bigwigs," 
are not so altogether innocent of this bashful style of building. 

You can almost hear the contradictions thundering against each 
other in this passage, like the "dark satanic mills" of Manchester 
itsel£ The city has built a cordon sanitaire to separate the industrial-
ists from the squalor they have unleashed on the world, concealing 
the demoralization of Manchester's working-class districts-and 
yet that disappearing act comes into the world without "conscious, 
explicit intention." The city seems artfully planned to hide its 
atrocities, and yet it "has been built less according to a plan' than 

• • • 37 



T,  
t 

• • • EMERGENCE 

any city in history. As Steven Marcus puts it, in his history of the 
young Engels's sojourn in Manchester, "The point to be taken is 
that this astonishing and outrageous arrangement cannot fully be 
understood as the result of a plot, or even a deliberate design, 
although those in whose interests it works also control it. It is 
indeed too huge and too complex a state of organized affairs ever to 
have been thought up in advance, to have preexisted as an idea." 

Those broad, glittering avenues, in other words, suggest a 
Potemkin village without a Potemkin. That mix of order and anar-
chy is what we now call emergent behavior. Urban critics since 
Lewis Mumford and Jane Jacobs have known that cities have lives 
of their own, with neighborhoods clustering into place without any 
Robert Moses figure dictating the plan from above. But that under-
standing has entered the intellectual mainstream only in recent 
years-when Engels paced those Manchester streets in the 1840s, 
he was left groping blindly, trying to find a culprit for the city's 
fiendish organization, even as he acknowledged that the city was 
notoriously unplanned. Like most intellectual histories, the devel-
opment of that new understanding-the sciences of complexity 
and self-organization-is a complicated, multithreaded tale, with 
many agents interacting over its duration. It is probably better to 
think of it as less a linear narrative and more an interconnected 
web, growing increasingly dense over the century and a half that 
separates us from Engels's first visit to Manchester. 

Complexity is a word that has frequently appeared in critical 
accounts of metropolitan space, but there are really two kinds of 
complexity fundamental to the city, two experiences with very dif-
ferent implications for the individuals trying to make sense of 
them. There is, first, the more conventional sense of complexity as 
sensory overload, the city stretching the human nervous system to 

38 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

its very extremes, and in the process teaching it a new series of 
reflexes-and leading the way for a complementary series of aes-
thetic values, which develop out like a scab around the original 
wound. The German cultural critic Walter Benjamin writes in his 
unfinished masterpiece, The Arcades Project: 

Perhaps the daily sight of a moving crowd once presented the 
eye with a spectacle to which it first had to adapt.... [T]hen the 
assumption is not impossible that, having mastered this task, 
the eye welcomed opportunities to confirm its possession of its 
new ability. The method of impressionist painting, whereby the 
picture is assembled through a riot offlecks of color, would then 
be a reflection of experience with which the eye of a big-city 
dweller has become familiar. 

There's a long tributary of nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
urban writing that leads into this passage, from the London chapters 
of Wordsworth's Prelude to the ambulatory musings of Joyce's 
Dubliners-. the noise and the senselessness somehow transformed 
into an aesthetic experience. The crowd is something you throw 
yourself into, for the pure poetry ofit all. But complexity is not solely 
a matter of sensory overload. There is also the sense of complexity 
as a self-organizing system-more Santa Fe Institute than Frankfurt 
School. This sort of complexity lives up one level: it describes 
the system of the city itself, and not its experiential reception by 
the city dweller. The city is complex because it overwhelms, yes, but 
also because it has a coherent personality, a personality that self-
organizes out of millions ofindividual decisions, a global order built 
out of local interactions. This is the "systematic" complexity that 
Engels glimpsed on the boulevards ofManchester: not the overload 
and anarchy he documented elsewhere, but instead a strange kind of 
order, a pattern in the streets that furthered the political values of 

39 



• • • EMERGENCE 

Manchester's elite without being deliberately planned by them. We 
know now from computer models and sociological studies-as well 
as from the studies of comparable systems generated by the social 
insects, such as Gordon's harvester ants-that larger patterns can 
emerge out of uncoordinated local actions. But for Engels and his 
contemporaries, those unplanned urban shapes must have seemed 
like a haunting. The city appeared to have a life of its own. 

A hundred and fifty years later, the same techniques translated 
into the language of software as in Mitch Resnick's slime mold 
simulation-trigger a similar reaction: the eerie sense of something 
lifelike, something organic forming on the screen. Even those 
with sophisticated knowledge about self-organizing systems still 
find these shapes unnerving-in their mix of stability and change, 
in their capacity for open-ended learning. The impulse to build 
centralized models to explain that behavior remains almost as 
strong as it did in Engels's day. When we see repeated shapes and 
structure emerging out of apparent chaos, we can't help looking for 
pacemakers. 

Understood in the most abstract sense, what Engels observed 
are patterns in the urban landscape, visible because they have a 
repeated structure that distinguishes them from the pure noise you 
might naturally associate with an unplanned city. They are patterns 
of human movement and decision-making that have been etched 
into the texture of city blocks, patterns that are then fed back to the 
Manchester residents themselves, altering their subsequent deci-
sions. (In that sense, they are the very opposite of the traditional 
sense of urban complexity-they are signals emerging where you 
would otherwise expect only noise.) A city is a kind of pattern· 
amplifying machine: its neighborhoods are a way of measuring and 
expressing the repeated behavior of larger collectivities-capturing 
information about group behavior, and sharing that information 
with the group. Because those patterns are fed back to the commu· 

40 ••• 



The Myth of the Ant Queen ••• 

nity, small shifts in behavior can quickly escalate into larger move-
ments: upscale shops dominate the main boulevards, while the 
working class remains clustered invisibly in the alleys and side 
streets; the artists live on the Left Bank, the investment bankers in 
the Eighth Arrondissement. You don't need regulations and city 
planners deliberately creating these structures. All you need are 
thousands of individuals and a few simple rules of interaction. The 
bright shop windows attract more bright shop windows and drive 
the impoverished toward the hidden core. There's no need for a 
Baron Haussmann in this world, just a few repeating patterns of 
movement, amplified into larger shapes that last for lifetimes: clus-
ters, slums, neighborhoods. 

Not all patterns are visible to every city dweller, though. The his-
tory of urbanism is also the story of more muted signs, built by the 
collective behavior of smaller groups and rarely detected by out-
siders. Manchester harbors several such secret clusters, persisting 
over the course of many generations, like a "standing wave in front 
of a rock in a fast-moving stream." One of them lies just north of 
Victoria University, at a point where Oxford Road becomes Oxford 
Street. There are reports dating back to the mid-nineteenth century 
of men cruising other men on these blocks, looking for casual sex, 
more lasting relationships, or even just the camaraderie of shared 
identity at a time when that identity dared not speak its name. 
Some historians speculate that Wittgenstein visited these streets 
during his sojourn in Manchester in 1908. Nearly a hundred years 
later, the area has christened itself the Gay Village and actively pro-
motes its coffee bars and boutiques as a must-see Manchester 
tourist destination, like Manhattan's Christopher Street and San 
Francisco's Castro. The pattern is now broadcast to a wider audi-
ence, but it has not lost its shape. 

I t f 41 



,  

• • • EMERGENCE 

But even at a lower amplitude, that signal was still loud enough 
to attract the attention of another ofManchester's illustrious immi-
grants: the British polymath Alan Turing. As part of his heroic 
contribution to the war effort, Turing had been a student of math-
ematical patterns, designing the equations and the machines that 
cracked the "unbreakable" German code of the Enigma device. 
After a frustrating three-year stint at the National Physical Labo-
ratory in London, Turing moved to Manchester in 1948 to help run 
the university's embryonic computing lab. It was in Manchester 
that Turing began to think about the problem of biological devel-
opment in mathematical terms, leading the way to the "Morpho-
genesis" paper, published in 1952, that Evelyn Fox Keller would ro 

rediscover more than a decade later. Turing's war research had 
focused on detecting patterns lurking within the apparent chaos of 
code, but in his Manchester years, his mind gravitated toward a 
mirror image of the original code-breaking problem: how complex 
patterns could come into being by following simple rules. How 
does a seed know how to build a flower? pn 

Turing's paper on morphogenesis-literally, "the beginning of hi! 
shape"-turned out to be one of his seminal works, ranking up their Pr 
with his more publicized papers and speculations: his work on lib 
Godel's undecidability problem, the Turing Machine, the Turing or 
Test-not to mention his contributions to the physical design of 
the modern digital computer. But the morphogenesis paper was 
only the beginning ofa shape a brilliant mind sensing the outlines 
of a new problem, but not fully grasping all its intricacies. IfTuring 
had been granted another few decades to explore the powers of 
self-assembly-not to mention access to the number-crunching 
horsepower of non-vacuum-tube computers--it's not hard to imag-
ine his mind greatly enhancing our subsequent understanding of 
emergent behavior. But the work on morphogenesis was tragically 
cut short by his death in 1954. )'t 

I 

42 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

Alan Turing was most likely a casualty of the brutally homo-
phobic Laws of postwar Britain, but his death also intersected with 
those discreet patterns of life on Manchester's sidewalks. Turing 
had known about that stretch of Oxford Road since his arrival in 
Manchester; on occasion, he would drift down to the neighbor-
hood, meeting other gay men-inviting some of them back to his 
fiat for conversation, and presumably some sort of physical contact. 
In January of 1952, Turing met a young man named Arnold Mur-
ray on those streets, and the two embarked on a brief relationship 
that quickly turned sour. Murray-or a friend of Murray's-broke 
into Turing's house and stole a few items. Turing reported the theft 
to the police and, with his typical forthrightness, made no effort to 
conceal the affair with Murray when the police visited his flat. 
Homosexuality was a criminal offense according to British law, 
punishable by up to two years' imprisonment, and so the police 
promptly charged both Turing and Murray with "gross indecency." 

On February 29, 1952, while the Manchester authorities were 
preparing their case against him, Turing finished the revisions to 
his morphogenesis paper, and he argued over its merits with Ilya 
Prigogine, the visiting Belgian chemist whose work on nonequi-
librium thermodynamics would later win him a Nobel prize. In 
one day, Turing had completed the text that would help engender 
the discipline of biomathematics and inspire Keller and Segel's 
slime mold discoveries fifteen years later, and he had enjoyed a 
spirited exchange with the man who would eventually achieve 
world fame for his research into self-organizing systems. On that 
winter day in 1952, there was no mind on the face of the earth bet-
ter prepared to wrestle with the mysteries of emergence than Alan 
Turing's. But the world outside that mind was conspiring to 
destroy it. That very morning, a local paper broke the story that the 
war-hero savant had been caught in an illicit affair with a nineteen-
year-old boy. 

• • • 43 



• • • EMERGENCE 

Within a few months Turing had been convicted of the crime 
and placed on a humiliating estrogen treatment to "cure" him of his e' 

homosexuality. Hounded by the authorities and denied security 
clearance for the top-secret British computing projects he had been 
contributing to, Turing died two years later, an apparent suicide. (f 

it 
Turing's career had already collided several times with the develop-
ing web of emergence before those fateful years in Manchester. In 
the early forties, during the height of the war effort, he had spent 
several months at the legendary Bell Laboratories on Manhattan's 1 
West Street, working on a number of encryption schemes, includ- ft 

ing an effort to transmit heavily encoded waveforms that could be 
decoded as human speech with the use of a special key. Early in his al 

visit to Bell Labs, Turing hit upon the idea of using another Bell tc 
invention, the Vocoder-later used by rock musicians such as Peter 
Frampton to combine the sounds of a guitar and the human 
voice as a way of encrypting speech. (By early 1943, Turing's ideas 
had enabled the first secure voice transmission to cross the Atlantic, 
unintelligible to German eavesdroppers.) Bell Labs was the home 
base for another genius, Claude Shannon, who would go on to 
found the influential discipline of information theory, and whose 
work had explored the boundaries between noise and information. a 
Shannon had been particularly intrigued by the potential for 
machines to detect and amplify patterns of information in noisy c 
communication channels-a line of inqlliry that promised obvious 
value to a telephone company, but could also save thousands oflives s 
in a war effort that relied so heavily on the sending and breaking of 
codes. Shannon and Turing immediately recognized that they had 
been working along parallel tracks: they were both code-breakers 
by profession at that point, and in their attempts to build auto· 
mated machines that could recognize patterns in audio signals or 

44 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

numerical sequences, they had both glimpsed a future populated by 
even more intelligence machines. Shannon and Turing passed 
many an extended lunchtime at the Bell Labs, trading ideas on an 
"electronic brain" that might be capable of humanlike feats of pat-
tern recognition. 

Turing had imagined hls thinking machine primarily in terms of 
its logical possibilities, its ability to execute an infinite variety of 
computational routines. But Shannon pushed him to think of the 
machine as something closer to an actual human brain, capabk of 
recognizing more nuanced patterns. One day over lunch at the lab, 
Turing exclaimed playfully to his colleagues, "Shannon wanu to 
feed not just data to a brain, but culturt1/ things! He wants to 
music to itl" Musical notes were patterns too, Shannon recognized, 
and ify ou could train an electronic brain to understand and respond 
to logical patterns of zeros and ones, then perhaps sometime in the 
future we could train our machines to appreciate the equivalent pat-
terns of minor chord progressjons and arpeggios. The idea eemed 
fanciful at the time- it was hard enough getting a machine to per• 
form long division, much les savor Beethoven's Ninth. But the p t· 
tern recognition that Tuting nnd Shannon envi&ioncd for di it1\I 
computers has, in recent ycurs, become n p rt of our tu.ltur 
life, with rnachines both gtnenuing mu k for our cntettlltnmtnt 
and recommending new atti ti fur u. to <"aj The «11u1tttion 
between mus1_!\ l p:1rterns md our neuro}o cld v iring ¥ a 
central role in one of th.c founding t ts of m\Xfero utifi · I in lli· 
gent-cl Dougla Hofstadter'" G _11, &d>a_, Our lunp.aen 
still haven't d"'1clo1 ed tM fur mu • but if the) nTI do. 
their kl11 will dilte. bu\'k th e tundninlt - en 
Sh nnon nd 1ltri1lg _t B(Il La . And that lnnn · be a 
kind of t incrgcnt-e, hightr.-IC'\"eJ rda form· - oot 
timp1c component p.u1 . 

Five . .Via hi$ ink ·th 1brin, 

. . .. 



r 
i 

• • • EMERGENCE f 
a long essay in the Bell System Technical journal that was quickly 
repackaged as a book called The Mathematical Theory of Commu-
nication. Dense with equations and arcane chapter titles such as 
"Discrete Noiseless Systems/' the book managed to becon1e some-
thing of a cult classic, and the discipline it spawned-information 
theory-had a profound impact on scientific and technological 
research that followed, on both a theoretical and practical level. The 
Mathematical Theory of Communication contained an elegant, lay-
man's introduction to Shannon's theory, penned by the esteemed 
scientist Warren Weaver, who had early on grasped the significance 
of Shannon's work. Weaver had played a leading role in the Natural 
Sciences division of the Rockefeller Foundation since 1932, and ( 

when he retired in the late .fifties, he composed a long report for the 
foundation, looking back at the scientific progress that had been 
achieved over the preceding quarter century. The occasion sug-
gested a reflective look backward, but the document that Weaver 
produced (based loosely on a paper he had written for American Sci-
entist) was far more prescient, more forward-looking. In many 
respects, it deserves to be thought of as the founding text of com-
plexity theory-the point at which the study of complex systems 
began to think of itself as a unified field. Drawing upon research in 
molecular biology, genetics, physics, computer science, and Shan- t 
non's information theory, Weaver divided the last few centuries of f 
scientific inquiry into three broad camps. First, the study of simple c 
systems: two or three variable problems, such as the rotation of t 
planets, or the connection between an electric current and its volt- l 

age and resistance. Second, problems of "disorganized complexity": l 

problems characterized by millions or billions of variables that can \ 

only be approached by the methods of statistical mechanics and l 
probability theory. These tools helped explain not only the behav-
ior of molecules in a gas, or the patterns of heredity in a gene pool, ( 

but also helped life insurance companies turn a profit despite their 
·' 

46 • • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • •• 

limited knowledge about any individual human's future health. 
Thanks to Claude Shannon's work, the statistical approach also 
helped phone companies deliver more reliable and intelligible long-
d.istance service. 

But there was a third phase to this progression, and we were only 
beginning to understand. «This statistical method of dealing with 
disorganized complexity, so powerful an advance over the earlier 
two-variable methods, leaves a great field untouched," Weaver 
wrote. There was a middle region between two-variable equations 
and problems that involved billions of variables. Conventionally, 
this region involved a "moderate" number of variables, but the size 
of the system was in fact a secondary characteristic: 

Much more important than the mere number of variables is the 
fact that these variables are all interrelated . . . . These problems, 
as contrasted with the disorganized situations with which sta-
tistics can cope, show the essential feature of organization. We will 
therefore refer to this group of problems as those of organized 
complexity. 

Think of these three categories of problems in terms of our bil-
liards table analogy from the introduction. A two- or three-variable 
problem would be an ordinary billiards table, with balls bouncing off 
one another following simple rules: their velocities, the friction of 
the table. That would be an example of a "simple system"--and 
indeed, billiard balls are often used to illustrate basic laws of physics 
in high school textbooks. A system of disorganized complexity 
would be that same table enlarged to include a million balls, collid-
ing with one another millions of times a second. Making predictions 
about the behavior of any individual ball in that mbc would be diffi-
cult, but you could make some accurate predictions about the over-
all behavior of the table. Assuming there's enough energy in the 

• • • 47 



• • • EMERGENCE 

system at the outset, the balls will spread to fill the entire table, like 
gas molecules in a container. It's complex because there are many 
interacting agents, but it's disorganized because they don't create any 
higher-level behavior other than broad statistical trends. Organized 
complexity, on the other hand, is like our motorized billiards table, 
where the balls follow specific rules and through their various inter-
actions create a distinct macrobehavior, arranging themselves in a 
specific shape, or forming a specific pattern over time. That sort of 
behavior, for Weaver, suggested a problem of organized complexity, 
a problem that suddenly seemed omnipresent in nature once you 
started to look for it: 

What makes an evening primrose open when it does? Why does 
salt water fail to satisfy thirst? ... What is the description of 
aging in biochemical terms? . . . What is a gene, and how does 
the original genetic constitution of a living organism express 
itself in the developed characteristics of the adult? 

All these are certainly complex problems. But they are not 
problems of disorganized complexity, to which statistical meth-
ods hold the key. They are all problems which involve dealing 
simultaneously with a sizable number of factors which are inter-
related into an organic whole. 

Tackling such problems required a new approach: "The great 
central concerns of the biologist ... are now being approached not 
only from above, with the broad view of the natural philosopher 
who scans the whole living world, but also from underneath, by the 
quantitative analyst who measures the underlying facts." This was 
a genuine shift in the paradigm of research, to use Thomas Kuhn's 
language a revolution not so much in the interpretations that sci-
ence built in its attempt to explain the world, but rather in the types 
of questions it asked. The paradigm shift was more than just a new 

48 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

mind-set, Weaver recognized; it was also a by-product of new tools 
that were appearing on the horizon. To solve the problems of orga-
nized complexity, you needed a machine capable of churning 
through thousands, if not millions, of calculations per second-a 
rate that would have been unimaginable for individual brains run-
ning the numbers with the limited calculating machines of the past 
few centuries. Because of his connection to the Bell Labs groupJ 
Weaver had seen early on the promise of digital computing, and he 
knew that the mysteries of organized complexity would be much 
easier to tackle once you could model the behavior in close·to-real 
time. For millennia, hurnans had used their skills at observation 
and classification to document the subtle anatomy of flowers, but 
for the first time they were perched on the brink of answering a 
more fundamental question, a question that had more to do with 
patterns developing over time than with static structure: W hy docs 
an evening prim.rose open when it does? And how does a simple 
seed know how to make a primrose in the ll!$t place? 

Alan Turing had played an essential role in c:reating both 
the hardware and the software that powered thi first digital teV<r 
lution1 and his work on morphogenc$i had been one of tht 6m 
systematic to imtlgine d:eve.Ioprnent i11 problem nforp• 
nj'ted cotnplcxity. It is one of the greut tn\gtdict of $let)' th t 
Turing didn't live to sce-,muth le s particip tt u1-thc at till.-
nary intellectual flo,vering th t took pl ere ' hen th en p s 
intersected°' 

lronicaUy; 'A" ttcn \Vci Ur o tion , t\"d ifft majof 
bre through in rk that h d n thin to do · di 'GI a>m"" 
pu ters worit thictt to , field not u iallr roru:idtm.I JWt 
of the hw . ln tile y n I.flu th<: -ar. wban 

h d bten t4\'.:ldu1 th(' pn>bltm « inftt.t" • It 

.. . ., 



• • • EMERGENCE 

slums with a decidedly top-down approach: razing entire neigh-
borhoods and building bleak high-rise housing projects, ringed by 
soon-to-be-derelict gardens and playgrounds. The projects effec-
tively tried to deal with the problem of dangerous city streets by 
eliminating streets altogether, and while the apartments in these 
new high-rises usually marked an improvement in living space and 
infrastructure, the overall environment of the projects quickly 
descended into an anonymous war zone that managed to both 
increase the crime rate in the area and destroy the neighborhood 
feel that had preceded them. 

In October of 1961, the New York City Planning Commission 
announced its findings that a large portion of the historic West 
Village was "characterized by blight, and suitable for clearance, 
replanning, reconstruction, or rehabilitation." The Village commu-
nity-a lively mix of artists, writers, Puerto Rican immigrants, and 
working-class Italian-Americans-responded with outrage, and at 
the center of the protests was an impassioned urban critic named 
Jane Jacobs. Jacobs had just spearheaded a successful campaign to 
block urban-development kingpin Robert Moses's plan to build a 
superhighway through the heart of SoHo, and she was now rurn-
ing her attention to the madness of the projects. (The proposed 
"rehabilitation" included Jacobs's own residence on Hudson 
Street.) In her valiant and ultimately triumphant bid to block the 
razing of the West Village, Jacobs argued that the 'vay to improve 
city streets and restore the dynamic civility of urban life was not to 
bulldoze the problem zones, but rather to look at city streets that 
did work and learn from them. Sometime in the writing of what 
would become The Death and Life of Gnat American Cities--
published shortly after the Village sho\vdo,vn-Jacobs read War-
ren Weaver's Rockefeller Foundation essay, and she immediately 
recognized her own agenda in his call for exploring problems of 
organized complexity. 

50 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

Under the seeming disorder of the old city, wherever the old city 
is working successfully, is a marvelous order for n1aintaining the 
safety of the streets and the freedom of the city. It is a complex 
order. Its essence is intimacy of sidewalk use, bringing with it a 
constant succession -of eyes. This order is all composed of move-
ment and change, and although it is life, not art, we may fanci-
fully call it the art forn1 of the city and liken it to the dance-not 
to a simple-minded precision dance with everyone kicking up 
at the same time, twirling in unison and bowing off en masse, but 
to an intriC1lte ballet in which the individual dancers and ensem-
bles all have distinctive parts which miraculously reinforce each 
other and compose an orderly whole. 

Jacobs gave D eath and Life's closing chapter the memorable title 
"The Kind of Problem a City Is," and she began it by quoting 
extensively from Weaver's essay. Understanding how a city works, 
Jacobs argued, demanded that you approach it as a problem from 
the street level up. "In parts of cities which are working well in 
some respects and badly in others (as is often the case), we cannot 
even analyze the virtues and the faults, diagnose the trouble or con-
sider helpful changes, without going at them as p'roblems of orga-
nized complexity," she wrote. "We may wish for easier, all-purpose 
analyses, and for simpler, magical, all-purpose cures, but wishing 
cannot change these problems into simpler matters than organized 
complexity, no matter how much we try to evade the realities and 
to handle them as something different." To understand the city's 
complex order, you needed to understand that ever-changing ballet; 
where city streets had lost their equilibrium, you couldn't simply 
approach the problem by fiat and bulldoze entire neighborhoods 
out of existence. 

Jacobs's book would revolutionize the way we imagined cities. 
Drawing on Weaver's insights, she conveyed a vision of the city as 

. . • 51 



• • • EMERGENCE 

far more than the sum of its residents-closer to a living organism, 
capable of adaptive change. "Vital cities have marvelous innate 
abilities for understanding, communicating, contriving and invent-
ing what is required to combat their difficulties," she wrote. They 
get their order from below; they are learning machines, pattern rec-
ognizers even when the patterns they respond to are unhealthy 
ones. A century after Engels glimpsed the systematic disappearing 
act of Manchester's urban poor, the self-organizing city had finally 
come into focus. 

"Organized complexity" proved to be a constructive way of think- . 
ing about urban life, but Jacobs's book was a work of social theory, 11'!1 

not science. Was it possible to model and explain the behavior of 
self-organizing systems using more rigorous methods? Could the 
developing technology of digital computing be usefully applied ·or 
to this problem? Partially thanks to Shannon's work in the late for-
ties, the biological sciences had made a number of significant 
breakthroughs in understanding pattern recognition and feedback 
by the time Jacobs published her masterpiece. Shortly after his (WI 

appointment to the Harvard faculty in 1956, the entomologist 
Edward 0 . Wilson convincingly proved that ants communicate 
with one another-and coordinate overall colony behavior-by 
recognizing patterns in pheromone trails left by fellov" ants, not 1· • 

mi 

unlike the cyclic AMP signals of the slime mold. At the Free 
University of Brussels in the fifties, Ilya Prigogine was making 
steady advances in his understanding of nonequilibrium thermody- c:c 
namics, environments where the la\YS of entropy are temporarily 
overcome, and higher-level order may spontaneously emerge out of 
underlying chaos. And at MlTJs Lincoln Laboratory. a twenty-
.five-year-old researcher named Oliver Selfridge was experimenting 
with a model for teachlng a computer how to learn. 

52 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

There is a world of difference between a computer that passively 
receives the information you supply and a computer that actively 
learns on its own. The very first generation of computers such as 
EN1AC had processed information fed to them by their masters, 
and they had been capable of performing various calculations with 
that data, based on the instruction sets programmed into them. 
This was a startling enough development at a time when "com-
puter" meant a person with a slide rule and an eraser. But even in 
those early days, the digital visionaries had imagined a machine 
capable of more open-ended learning. Turing and Shannon had 
argued over the future musical tastes of the "electronic brain" during 
lunch hour at Bell Labs, while their colleague Norbert Wiener had 
written a best-selling paean to the self-regulatory powers of feed-
back in his 1949 manifesto Cybernetics. 

"Mostly my participation in all of this is a matter of good luck 
for me," Selfridge says today, sitting in his cramped, windowless 
MIT office. Born in England, Selfridge enrolled at Harvard at the 
age of fifteen and started his doctorate three years later at MIT, 
where Norbert Wiener was his dissertation adviser. As a precocious 
twenty-one-year-old, Selfridge suggested a few corrections to a 
paper that his mentor had published on heart flutters, corrections 
that Wiener graciously acknowledged in the opening pages of 
Cybernetics. "I think I now have the honor of being one of the few 
living people mentioned in that book," Selfridge says, laughing. 

After a sojourn working on military control projects in New Jer-
sey, Selfridge returned to MIT in the midfifties. His return coin-
cided with an explosion of interest in artificial intelligence (AI), a 
development that introduced him to a then-junior fellow at Har-
vard named Marvin Minsky. "My concerns in AI," Selfridge says 
now, "were not so much the actual processing as they were in how 
systems change, how they evolve---in a word, how they learn." 
Exploring the possibilities of machine learning brought Selfridge 

• • • 53 



• • • EMERGENCE 

back to memories of his own education in England. "At school in 
England I had read John Milton's Paradise Lost," he says, "and I'd 
been struck by the image of Pandemonium-it's Greek for 'all the 
demons.' Then after my second son, Peter, was born, I went over 
Paradise Lost again, and the shrieking of the demons awoke some-
thing in me." The pattern recognizer in Selfridge's brain had hit 
upon a way of teaching a computer to recognize patterns. 

"We are proposing here a model of a process which we claim can 
adaptively improve itself to handle certain pattern-recognition 
problems which cannot be adequately specified in advance."These 
were the first words Selfridge delivered at a symposium in late 
1958, held at the very same National Physical Laboratory from 
which Turing had escaped a decade before. Selfridge's presentation 
had the memorable title "Pandemonium: A Paradigm for Learn-
ing," and while it had little impact outside the nascent computer-
science community, the ideas Selfridge outlined that day \vould 
eventually become part of our everyday life each time we enter a ' 

name in our PalmPilots or use voice-recognition sofuvare to ask for 
information over the phone. Pandemonium, as Selfridge outlined it 
in his talk, was not so much a specific piece of software as it was a 
way of approaching a problem. The problem was an ambitious one, 
given the limited computational resources of the day: ho\v to teach 
a computer to recognize patterns that were ill-ddined or erratic, 
like the sound waves that comprise spoken language. 

The brilliance of Selfridge,s new paradign1 lay in the fact that it 
relied on a distributed, bottom-up intelligence, and not a unified, 
top-down one. Rather than build a single smart program, Selfridge 
created a swarn1 oflimited n1iniprograms, which he called demons. 
"The idea was, we have a bunch of these demons shrieking up the 
hierarchy," he explains. "Lower-level demons shrieking to higher· 
level demons shrieking to higher ones .. , 

To understand what that "shrieking" means, imagine a system 

54 • • • • 



Tho Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

with twenty-six individual demons, each trained to recognize a let-
ter of the alphabet. The pool of demons is shown a series of words, 
and each demon "votes" as to whether each letter displayed repre-
sents its chosen letter. If the firs t letter is a, the a-recognizing 
demon reports that it is highly likely that it has recognized a match. 
Because of the similarities in shape, the o-recognizer might report a 
possible match, while the b-recognizer would emphatically declare 
that the letter wasn't intelligible to it. All the letter-recognizing 
demons would report to a master demon, who would tally up the 
votes for each letter and choose the demon that expressed the high-
est confidence. Then the software would move on to the next letter 
in the sequence, and the process would begin again. At the end of 
the transmission, the master demon would have a working inter-
pretation of the text that had been transmitted, based on the assem-
bled votes of the demon democracy. 

Of course, the accuracy of that interpretation depended on the 
accuracy of the letter recognizers. If you were trying to teach a 
computer how to read, it was cheating to assume from the outset 
that you could find twenty-six accurate letter recognizers. Selfridge 
was after a larger goal: How do you teach a machine to recognize 
letters-or vowel sounds, minor chords, fingerprints-in the first 
place? The answer involved adding another layer of demons, and a 
feedback mechanism whereby the various demon guesses could be 
graded. This lower level was populated by even less sophisticated 
miniprograms, trained only to recognize raw physical shapes (or 
sounds, in the case of Morse code or spoken language). Some 
demons recognized parallel lines, others perpendicular ones. Some 
demons looked for circles, others for dots. None of these shapes 
were associated with any particular letter; these bottom-dwelling 
demons were like two-year-old children-capable of reporting on 
the shapes they witnessed, but not perceiving them as letters or 
words. 

• . • 55 



• • • EMERGENCE 

Using these minimally equipped demons, the system could be 
trained to recognize letters, without "knowing" anything about the 
alphabet in advance. The recipe was relatively simple: Present the 
letter b to the bottom-level demons, and see which ones respond, 
and which ones don't. In the case of the letter b, the vertical-line 
recognizers might respond, along with the circle recognizers. Those 
lower-level demons would report to a letter-recognizer one step 
higher in the chain. Based on the information gathered from its 
lieutenants, that recognizer would make a guess as to the letter1s 
identity. Those guesses are then "graded" by the software. If the 
guess is wrong, the software learns to dissociate those particular 
lieutenants from the letter in question; if the guess happens to be 
right, it strengthens the connection between the lieutenants and the 
letter. 

The results are close to random at first, but if you repeat the 
process a thousand times, or ten thousand, the system learns to 
associate specific assembles of shape-recognizers with specific let-
ters and soon enough is capable of translating entire sentences with 
remarkable accuracy. The system doesn't come with any predefined 
conceptions about the shapes of letters-you train the system, to .,,. 

f.o\!,,, 

associate letters with specific shapes in the grading phase. (This is 
why handwriting-recognition software can adapt to so many dif-
ferent types of penmanship, but can't adapt to penmanship that 
changes day to day.) That mix of random beginnings organizing 
into more complicated results reminded Selfridge of another 
process, whose own underlying code wus just then being deci-

' " '· 
phered in the form of DNA. «The scheme sketched is really a nat- do 
ural selection on the processing demons," Selfridge explained. "If '41 
they serve a useful function they survive and perhaps are even the 
source for other subdemons who are themselves judged on their 

\1 
merits. It is perfectly reasonable to conceive of this taking place on :c 
a broader scale ... instead of having but one Pandemonium we . 

"' 
56 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

might have some cro'vd of the1n, all fairly similarly constructed, 
and employ natural selection on the crowd of them.11 

The system Selfridge described-with its bottom-up learning, 
and its evaluating feedback loops-belongs in the history books as 
the first practical description of an emergent software program. 
The \vorld now swarms with millions of his demons. 

Among the students at MIT in the late forties was a transplanted 
midw·estemer named John Holland. Holland was also a pupil of 
Norbert Wiener,s, and he spent a great deal of his undergraduate 
years stealing time on the early computer prototypes being built in 
Cambridge at that time. His unusual expertise at computer pro-
gramming led IBM to hire him in the fifties to help develop their 
first commercial calculator, the 701. As a student of Wiener's, he 
was naturally inclined to experiment with ways to make the slug-
gish 701 machine learn in a more organic, bottom-up fashion-not 
unlike Selfridge,s Pandemonium-and Holland and a group of 
like-minded colleagues actually programmed a crude simulation of 
neurons interacting. But IBM was in the business of selling adding 
machines then, and so Holland's work went largely ignored and 
underfunded. After a few years Holland returned to academia to 
get his doctorate at the University of Michigan, where the Logic of 
Computers Group had just been formed. 

In the sixties, after graduating as the first computer science 
Ph.D. in the country, Holland began a line of inquiry that would 
dominate his work for the rest of his life. Like Turing, Holland 
wanted to explore the way simple rules could lead to complex 
behavior; like Selfridge, he wanted to create software that would be 
capable of open-ended learning. Holland,s great breakthrough was 
to harness the forces of another bottom-up, open-ended system: 
natural selection. Building on Selfridge's Pandemonium model, 

• • • 57 



• • • EMERGENCE 

Holland took the logic of Darwinian evolution and built it into 
code. He called his new creation the genetic algorithm. 

A traditional software program is a series of instructions that 
tells the computer what to do: paint the screen with red pixels, 
multiply a set of numbers, delete a file. Usually those instructions 
are encoded as a series of branching paths: do this first, and if you 
get result A, do one thing; ify ou get result B, do another thing. The 
art of programming lay in figuring out how to construct the most 
efficient sequence of instructions, the sequence that would get the 
most done with the shortest amount of code and with the least 
likelihood of a crash. Normally that was done using the raw intel-
lectual firepower of the programmer's mind. You thought about the 
problem, sketched out the best solution, fed it into the computer, 
evaluated its success, and then tinkered with it to make it better. 
But Holland imagined another approach: set up a gene pool of 
possible software and let successful programs evolve out of the 
soup. ..'   .'.  

Holland1s system revolved around a series of neat parallels 
between computer programs and earth1s life-forms. Each depends 
on a master code for its existence: the zeros and ones of computer 
programming, and the coiled strands of DNA lurking in all of our mI at 
cells (usually called the genotype). Those two kinds of codes dictate 
some kind of higher-level form or behavior (the phenotype): grow-
ing red hair or multiplying two numbers together. With DNA-
based organisms, natural selection works by creating a massive pool 
of genetic variation, then evaluating the success rate of the assorted 
behaviors unleashed by all those genes. Sue essful variations gtt 
passed down to the next generation, while unsuccessful ones disap- I 

l 

pear. Sexual reproduction ensures that the innovative combinations 
of genes find each other. Occaslonally, random mutations appear in 
the gene pool, introducing complete new avenues for the system to 
explore. Run through enough cycles, and you have a recipe for 

58 . • . 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

engineering masterworks like the human eye-without a bona fide 
engineer in sight. 

The genetic algorithm was an attempt to capture that process in 
silicon. Software al.ready has a genotype and a phenotype, H olland 
recognized; there's the code itself, and then there's what the code 
actually does. What if you created a gene pool of d.iffe·rent code 
combinations, then evaluated the success rate of the phenotypes. 
eliminating the least successful strands? Natural selection relies on 
a brilliantly simple, but somewhat tautological, criterion for evalu-
ating success: your genes get to pass on to the next generation ify ou 
su.rv.ive long enough to produce a next generation. Holland decided 
to make that evalu.ation step more precise: his program$ would be 
admitted to the next generation if they did a better job of aa:om-
plishing a specific task-doing simple math, say1 or recognizing 
patterns in visual images. The progrrunmer could decide what the 
task was; he or she just couldn't directly instruct the s:oft\\"!lR' how 
to accomplish it. He or she would set up tht> that 
defined genetic fitness, then let the software evolve on \ts own. 

H olland developed his ideas in the ixtic and $tV<:.:nti usi 
tnostly pa.per and penci}-.cvcn the advanced te hnol (): 
that em was fur too slo\ to chum through tht thounruifold geMr* 
n.tions of evoJutionary time. But them t\l'fl · puallcl bi h-tp«d 
computers int:roduced in the e.i Dann,. . 1--iilli.$•• eon ... 
n.oction M1.1chin¢-"'\Ver'C s:uitcd f<>r exploring tbto. powen: o-i 
the genetic 1\nd oft he most impmsift G f$tfm 
devised for tl)e onnectio.n M · oa timu. . 
la.Ung the behilviof of 

It program Ollk.J Tracw, in the mi Ue1 b'r 
twt.>U I profu A,) jdf'USOO and Ctn "' Taylof. (FtJe1 
'·Vii ln the eotnputtT \'\iuk Ta,.to-1 a bioln-
glft.) w1 gut the trom Ri '"hatd Da ' nr biilO ·n., 

•} e1lmoo rM. 



• • • EMERGENCE 

He makes the point that in order to watch Darwinian evolution in 
action, all you need are objects that are capable of reproducing them-
selves, and reproducing themselves imperfectly, and having some sort 
of resource limitation so that there's competition. And nothing else o: 
matters--it's a very tiny, abstract axiom that is required to make evo-
lution work. And so it occurred to me that programs have those 
properties-programs can reproduce themselves. Except that they 
usually reproduce themselves exactly. But I recognized that if there 
was a way to have them reproduce imperfectly, and ify ou had not just 
one program but a whole population of them, then you could simu- re 
late evolution with the software instead of organisms." 

After a few small-scale experiments, Jefferson and Taylor 
decided to simulate the behavior of ants learning to follow a ro 
pheromone trail. "Ants were on my miild-I was looking for simple 
creatures, and E. 0 . Wilson's opus on ants had just come out," Jef- en 
ferson explains. "What we were really looking for was a simple wk 
that simple creatures perform where it wasn't obvious how to make 
a program do it. Somehow we came up with the idea of following a ce: 
trail-and not just a clean trail, a noisy trail, a broken trail." The 
two scientists created a virtual grid of squares, drawing a meander- Ult 
ing path of eighty-two squares across it. Their goal was to evolve a wi: 
simple program, a virtual ant, that could navigate the length of the 
path in a finite amount of time, using only limited infonnition 
about the path's twists and turns. At each cycle, an ant had the _tp,.•,  
option of"sniffing" the square ahead of hUn, advancing forward one 
square, or turning right or left ninety degrees. Jefferson and Taylor 
gave their ants one hundred cycles to navigate the path; once an ant 
used up his hundred cycles, the software tallied up the number of 
squares on the trail he had successfully landed on and gave him a 
score. An ant that lost his way after square one would he graded 1; 
an ant that successfully completed the trail before the hundred 
cycles were up would get a perfect score, 82. •.. ..  

60 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • •• 

The scoring system allowed Jefferson and Taylor to create fit-
ness criteria that determined which ants were allowed to reproduce. 
Tracker began by simulating sixteen thousand ants--one for each 
of the Connection Machine's processors-with sixteen thousand 
more or less random strategies for trail navigation. One ant might 
begin with the strategy of marching straight across the grid; 
another by switching back and forth between ninety-degree rota-
tions and sniffings; another following mo.re baroque rules. The 
great preponderance of these strategies would be complete disas-
ters, but a few would allow a stumble across a larger portion of the 
trail. Those more successful ants would be allowed to mate and 
reproduce, creating a new generation of sixteen thousand ants ready 
to tackle the trail. 

The path-dubbed the John Muir Trail after the famous 
environmentalist-began with a relatively straightforward section, 
with a handful of right-hand turns and longer straight sectlo.ns,, 
then steadily grew more complicated. Jefferson says now that he 
designed it that way because he was worried that early genemtion 
would be so incompetent that a more challenging path '"·ould 
utterly confound them. "You have to remember that we had no lde.a 
when we started this experiment whether sixteen thousand 'W'& 
anywhere near n large enough population to seek Darwini l\ C'\'Ofu" 
tion ,11 he explains. 11And I didn't know if it \\rit going to take ltn 
generations, or one hundred g;encrarion 1 or kn tho nd 
tions. T here wns no theory to guide us ·qu nritutivd\• about citbe.t 
the size of the population in spa oc 01 the length of thc. 
in clrne.n  

Ru r1ning tb:ro\Jgh one hundred gtnerationi too about 
houn; JeffeISon nod Tn 4or tht ro thtm ru!-

upd lte on the m st went d tl. of Likr a 
stock ticker, the Connt'ction hinc sp1t out an updattd 
number the end of n: tf the · st tml·fo.Uo o 

• • • 



• • • EMERGENCE 

one generation managed to hit fifteen squares in a hundred cycles, 
the Connection Machine would report that 15 was the current 
record and then move on to the next generation. After a few false 
starts because of bugs, Jefferson and Taylor got the Tracker system l 
to work-and the results exceeded even their most optimistic 
expectations. 

"To our wonderment and utter joy,"Jefferson recalls, "it succeeded 
the first time. We were sitting there watching these numbers come 
in: one generation would produce twenty-five, then twenty-five, and 
then it would be twenty-seven, and then thirty. Eventually we saw a 
perfect score, after about a hundred generations. It was mind· 
blowing." The software had evolved an en tire population of expert 
trail-followers, despite the fact that Jefferson and Taylor had 
endowed their first generation of ants with no skills whatsoevet 
Rather than engineer a solution to the trail-following problem, ilit 
two UCLA professors had evolved a solution; they had created a ran· 
dom pool of possible programs, then built a feedback mechanism 
that allowed more successful programs to emerge. lo fact, the 
evolved programs were so successful that they'd developed solutions 
custom-tailored to their environments. When Jefferson and TaylOi 
"dissected" one of the final champion ants to see what trail-follmving I 
strategies he had developed, they discovered that the software had 
evolved a preference for making right-hand turns, in response to 
the three initial right turns that Jefferson had built into the John t 
Muir Trail. It was like watching an organ.ism living in water evoh'· 
ing gills: even in the crud.e, abstract grid ofTracker, the virtual ants J 
evolved a strategy for survival that \WS uniquely adapted to their ( 
env•i ronment. 

By any measure, Tracker \vas a genuine breakthrough. Finally 
the tools of n1odcrn computing 11ad advanced to the point \\''hert 
you could simulate e1nergent intelligence, watch it unfold 
screen in real time, as Turing and Selfridge and Shannon had 

62 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Qu een · • • 

dreamed of doing years before. And it was only fitting that Jeffer-
son and Taylor had chosen to simulate precisely the organism 1nost 
celebrated for its emergent behavior: the ant. They began, of 
course, with the most elemental form of ant intelligence-sniffing 
for pheromone trails--but the possibilities suggested by the success 
of Tracker \vere endless. The tools of emergent software had been 
harnessed to model and understand the evolution of emergent 
intelligence in real-world organisms. In fact, watching those virtual 
ants evolve on the computer screen, learning and adapting to their 
environments on their own, you couldn't help wonder if the divi-
sion bet\veen the real and the virtual was becoming increasingly 
hazy. 

In Mitch Resnick's computer simulation of slime mold behavior, 
there are two key variables, two elements that you can alter in your 
interaction with the simulation. The first is the number of slime 
mold cells in the system; the second is the physical and temporal 
length of the pheromone trail left behind by each cell as it crawls 
across the screen. (You can have long trails that take minutes to 
evaporate, or short ones that disappear within seconds.) Because 
slime mold cells collectively decide to aggregate based on their 
encounters with pheromone trails, altering these two variables can 
have a massive impact on the simulated behavior of the system. 
Keep the trails short and the cells few, and the slime molds will 
steadfastly refuse to come together. The screen will look like a busy 
galaxy of shooting stars, with no larger shapes emerging. But turn 
up the duration of the trails, and the number of agents, and at acer-
tain clearly defined point, a cluster of cells will suddenly form. The 
system has entered a phase transition, moving from one discrete 
state to another, based on the "organized complexity" of the slime 
mold cells. This is not gradual, but sudden, as though a switch had 

• • • 63 



• • • EMERGENCE 

been flipped. But there are no switch-flippers, no pacemakers-just 
a swarm of isolated cells colliding with one another, and leaving 
behind their pheromone footprints. 

Histories of intellectual development-the origin and spread of 
new ideas-usually come in two types of packages: either the "great 
man" theory, where a single genius has a eureka moment in the lab 
or the library and the world is immediately transformed; or the 
"paradigm shift" theory, where the occupants of the halls of science 
awake to find an entirely new floor has been built on top of them, 
and within a few years, everyone is working out of the new offices. 
Both theories are inadequate: the great-man story ignores the dis-
tributed, communal effort that goes into any important intellectual 
advance, and the paradigm-shift model has a hard time explaining 
how the new floor actually gets built. I suspect Mitch Resnick's 
slime mold simulation may be a better metaphor for the way idea 
revolutions come about: think of those slime mold cells as investi-
gators in the field; think of those trails as a kind of institutional 
memory. With only a few minds exploring a given problem, the 
cells remain disconnected, meandering across the screen as isolated 
units, each pursuing its own desultory course. With pheromone 
trails that evaporate quickly, the cells leave no trace of their 
progress-like an essay published in a journal that sits unread on a 
library shelf for years. But plug more minds into the system and 
give their work a longer, more durable trail-by publishing their 
ideas in best-selling books, or founding research centers to CA'Plore 
those ideas-and before long the system arrives at a phase trnlS'i-
tion: isolated hunches and private obsessions coalesce into a new 
way of looking at the world, shared by thousands of individuals. 

This is exactly what happened ,\'lth the botttln1-up mind-set 
over the past three decades. After years of disconnected investiga-
tions, the varied labors of Turing1 Shannon, Wiener, Selfridge, 
Weaver, Jacobs, Holland, and Prigogioe had st1U'ted a revolution in 

64 • . ' 



The Myth of the Ant Queen • • • 

the way we thought about the world and its systems. By the time 
Jefferson and Taylor started tinkering with their virtual ants in the 
midcighties, the trails of intellectual inquiry had grown long attd 
interconnected enough to create a higher-level order. (Call it the 
emergence of emergence.) A field of research that had been char-
acterized by a handful of early-stage investigations blossomed 
overnight into a densely populated and diverse landscape, trans-
forming dozens of existing disciplines and inventing a handful of 
new ones. In 1969, rv1insky and Seymour published 
"Perceptrons,n which built on Selfridge's Pandemonium device for 
distributed pattern recognition, leading the way for Minsky's bot-
tom-up Society of Mind theory developed over the following 
decade. In 1972, a Rockefeller University professor named Gerald 
Edelman won the Nobel prize for his work decoding the language 
of antibody molecules, leading the way for an understanding of the 
immune system as a self-learning pattern-recognition device. Pri-
gogine's Nobel followed five years later. At the end of the decade, 
Douglas H ofstadter published Godel, Escher, Bach, linking artificial 
intelligence, pattern recognition, ant colonies, and "The Goldberg 
Variations." Despite its arcane subject matter and convoluted 
rhetorical structure, the book became a best-seller and won the 
Pulitzer prize for nonfiction. 

By the mideighties, the revolution was in full swing. The Santa 
Fe Institute was founded in 1984; James Gleick's book Chaos 
arrived three years later to worldwide adulation, quickly followed 
by two popular-science books each called Complexity. Artificial-life 
studies flourished, partially thanks to the success of software pro-
grams like Tracker. In the humanities, critical theorists such as 
Manuel De Landa started dabbling with the conceptual tools of 
self-organization, abandoning the then-trendy paradigm of post-
structuralism or cultural studies. The phase transition was com-
plete; Warren Weaver's call for the study of organized complexity 

• • • 65 



• • • EMERGENCE 

had been vigorously answered. Warren Weavers's "middle region" 
had at last been occupied by the scientific vanguard. 

We are now living through the third phase of that revolution. You 
can date it back to the day in the early nineties when Will Wright 
released a program called SimCity, which would go on to become 
one of the best-selling video-game franchises of all time. SimCity 
would also inaugurate a new phase in the developing story of self-
organizing: emergent behavior was no longer purely an object of 
study, something to interpret and model in the lab. It was also some-
thing you could build, something you could interact with, and some-
thing you could sell. While Sim City came out of the developing web 
of the bottom-up worldview, it suggested a whole new opening: 
SimCity was a work of culture, not science. It aimed to entertain, 
not explain. 

Ten years after Wright's release of SirnCity, the world nmv 
abounds with these man-made systems: online stores use them to 
recognize our cultural tastes; artists use them to create a new kind of 
adaptive cultural form; Web sites use them to regulate their online 
communities; marketers use them to detect demographic pa.ttems in 
the general public. The video-game industry itself h.as exploded in 
size, surpassing Hollywood in terms of raw sales numbers-with 
many of the best-selling titles relying on the po\vers of digital self-
organization. And with that popular success has come a subtle, but 
significant, trickle-down effect: \Ve are starting to think using the 
conceptual tools of botton1-up systen1s. Just like the clock maker 
metaphors of the Enlightenment, or the dialectical logic of the nine-
teenth century, the emergent worldview belongs to this moment in 
time, shaping our thought habits and coloring our perception of the 
world. As our everyday life becomes increasingly populated by arti· 
.6.cial emergence, \.VC will find ourselves relying more and more on 

66 • • • 



The Myth of the Ant Queen 

the logic of these systems-both in corporate America, where 
"bottom-up intelligence" has started to replace "quality manage-
ment" as the mantra of the day, and in the radical, antiglobalization 
protest movements, who e.xplicitly model their pacemakerless, dis-
tributed organizations after ant colonies and slime molds. Former 
vice president Al Gore is himself a devotee of complexity theory and 
can talk for hours about what the bottom-up paradigm could mean 
for reinventing government. Almost two centuries after Engels 
wrestled with the haunting of Manchester's city streets, and fifty 
years after Turing puzzled over the mysteries of a flower's bloom, 
the circle is finally complete. Our minds may be wired to look for 
pacemakers, but we are steadily learning how to think from the 
bottom up. 

67